The Sampling Theorem
$(function(){
	if($.browser.msie){
        if($.browser.version.substr(0,1)!="9"){
            $('#greenBox2').corner({tl:{radius:5}, tr:{radius:5}, bl:{radius:5}, br:{radius:5}, antiAlias:true });
        }
    }else{
        $('#greenBox2').corner({tl:{radius:5}, tr:{radius:5}, bl:{radius:3}, br:{radius:5}, antiAlias:true });
    }
});
The Scientist and Engineer's Guide to
Digital Signal Processing
By Steven W. Smith, Ph.D.
Home
The Book by Chapters
About the Book
Copyright and permissible use
What is DSP?
8 good reasons for learning DSP
Comments by reviewers
Errata
Free Software and Teaching Aids
Differences Between Editions
Steven W. Smith
Blog
Contact
$(function() {$("#nav").droppy();});
Book Search
Download this chapter in PDF format
Chapter3.pdf
Table of contents
1: The Breadth and Depth of DSP
The Roots of DSP
Telecommunications
Audio Processing
Echo Location
Image Processing
2: Statistics, Probability and Noise
Signal and Graph Terminology
Mean and Standard Deviation
Signal vs. Underlying Process
The Histogram, Pmf and Pdf
The Normal Distribution
Digital Noise Generation
Precision and Accuracy
3: ADC and DAC
Quantization
The Sampling Theorem
Digital-to-Analog Conversion
Analog Filters for Data Conversion
Selecting The Antialias Filter
Multirate Data Conversion
Single Bit Data Conversion
4: DSP Software
Computer Numbers
Fixed Point (Integers)
Floating Point (Real Numbers)
Number Precision
Execution Speed: Program Language
Execution Speed: Hardware
Execution Speed: Programming Tips
5: Linear Systems
Signals and Systems
Requirements for Linearity
Static Linearity and Sinusoidal Fidelity
Examples of Linear and Nonlinear Systems
Special Properties of Linearity
Superposition: the Foundation of DSP
Common Decompositions
Alternatives to Linearity
6: Convolution
The Delta Function and Impulse Response
Convolution
The Input Side Algorithm
The Output Side Algorithm
The Sum of Weighted Inputs
7: Properties of Convolution
Common Impulse Responses
Mathematical Properties
Correlation
Speed
8: The Discrete Fourier Transform
The Family of Fourier Transform
Notation and Format of the Real DFT
The Frequency Domain's Independent Variable
DFT Basis Functions
Synthesis, Calculating the Inverse DFT
Analysis, Calculating the DFT
Duality
Polar Notation
Polar Nuisances
9: Applications of the DFT
Spectral Analysis of Signals
Frequency Response of Systems
Convolution via the Frequency Domain
10: Fourier Transform Properties
Linearity of the Fourier Transform
Characteristics of the Phase
Periodic Nature of the DFT
Compression and Expansion, Multirate methods
Multiplying Signals (Amplitude Modulation)
The Discrete Time Fourier Transform
Parseval's Relation
11: Fourier Transform Pairs
Delta Function Pairs
The Sinc Function
Other Transform Pairs
Gibbs Effect
Harmonics
Chirp Signals
12: The Fast Fourier Transform
Real DFT Using the Complex DFT
How the FFT works
FFT Programs
Speed and Precision Comparisons
Further Speed Increases
13: Continuous Signal Processing
The Delta Function
Convolution
The Fourier Transform
The Fourier Series
14: Introduction to Digital Filters
Filter Basics
How Information is Represented in Signals
Time Domain Parameters
Frequency Domain Parameters
High-Pass, Band-Pass and Band-Reject Filters
Filter Classification
15: Moving Average Filters
Implementation by Convolution
Noise Reduction vs. Step Response
Frequency Response
Relatives of the Moving Average Filter
Recursive Implementation
16: Windowed-Sinc Filters
Strategy of the Windowed-Sinc
Designing the Filter
Examples of Windowed-Sinc Filters
Pushing it to the Limit
17: Custom Filters
Arbitrary Frequency Response
Deconvolution
Optimal Filters
18: FFT Convolution
The Overlap-Add Method
FFT Convolution
Speed Improvements
19: Recursive Filters
The Recursive Method
Single Pole Recursive Filters
Narrow-band Filters
Phase Response
Using Integers
20: Chebyshev Filters
The Chebyshev and Butterworth Responses
Designing the Filter
Step Response Overshoot
Stability
21: Filter Comparison
Match #1: Analog vs. Digital Filters
Match #2: Windowed-Sinc vs. Chebyshev
Match #3: Moving Average vs. Single Pole
22: Audio Processing
Human Hearing
Timbre
Sound Quality vs. Data Rate
High Fidelity Audio
Companding
Speech Synthesis and Recognition
Nonlinear Audio Processing
23: Image Formation & Display
Digital Image Structure
Cameras and Eyes
Television Video Signals
Other Image Acquisition and Display
Brightness and Contrast Adjustments
Grayscale Transforms
Warping
24: Linear Image Processing
Convolution
3x3 Edge Modification
Convolution by Separability
Example of a Large PSF: Illumination Flattening
Fourier Image Analysis
FFT Convolution
A Closer Look at Image Convolution
25: Special Imaging Techniques
Spatial Resolution
Sample Spacing and Sampling Aperture
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Morphological Image Processing
Computed Tomography
26: Neural Networks (and more!)
Target Detection
Neural Network Architecture
Why Does it Work?
Training the Neural Network
Evaluating the Results
Recursive Filter Design
27: Data Compression
Data Compression Strategies
Run-Length Encoding
Huffman Encoding
Delta Encoding
LZW Compression
JPEG (Transform Compression)
MPEG
28: Digital Signal Processors
How DSPs are Different from Other Microprocessors
Circular Buffering
Architecture of the Digital Signal Processor
Fixed versus Floating Point
C versus Assembly
How Fast are DSPs?
The Digital Signal Processor Market
29: Getting Started with DSPs
The ADSP-2106x family
The SHARC EZ-KIT Lite
Design Example: An FIR Audio Filter
Analog Measurements on a DSP System
Another Look at Fixed versus Floating Point
Advanced Software Tools
30: Complex Numbers
The Complex Number System
Polar Notation
Using Complex Numbers by Substitution
Complex Representation of Sinusoids
Complex Representation of Systems
Electrical Circuit Analysis
31: The Complex Fourier Transform
The Real DFT
Mathematical Equivalence
The Complex DFT
The Family of Fourier Transforms
Why the Complex Fourier Transform is Used
32: The Laplace Transform
The Nature of the s-Domain
Strategy of the Laplace Transform
Analysis of Electric Circuits
The Importance of Poles and Zeros
Filter Design in the s-Domain
33: The z-Transform
The Nature of the z-Domain
Analysis of Recursive Systems
Cascade and Parallel Stages
Spectral Inversion
Gain Changes
Chebyshev-Butterworth Filter Design
The Best and Worst of DSP
34: Explaining Benford's Law
Frank Benford's Discovery
Homomorphic Processing
The Ones Scaling Test
Writing Benford's Law as a Convolution
Solving in the Frequency Domain
Solving Mystery #1
Solving Mystery #2
More on Following Benford's law
Analysis of the Log-Normal Distribution
The Power of Signal Processing
How to order your own hardcover copy
Wouldn't you rather have a bound book instead of 640 loose pages?
Your laser printer will thank you!
Order from
Amazon.com
.
Chapter 3 - ADC and DAC
/ The Sampling Theorem
Chapter 3: ADC and DAC
The Sampling Theorem
The definition of
proper sampling
is quite simple.   Suppose you sample a
continuous signal in some manner.  If you can exactly
reconstruct
the analog
signal from the samples, you must have done the sampling
properly
.  Even if the
sampled data appears confusing or incomplete, the key information has been
captured if you can reverse the process.
Figure 3-3 shows several sinusoids before and after digitization.  The continious
line represents the analog signal entering the ADC, while the square markers are
the digital signal leaving the ADC.  In (a), the analog signal is a constant DC
value, a cosine wave of
zero
frequency.  Since the analog signal is a series of
straight lines between each of the samples, all of the information needed to
reconstruct the analog signal is contained in the digital data.  According to our
definition, this is
proper sampling.
The sine wave shown in (b) has a frequency of 0.09 of the sampling rate.  This
might represent, for example, a 90 cycle/second sine wave being sampled at
1000 samples/second.  Expressed in another way, there are 11.1 samples taken
over each complete cycle of the sinusoid.  This situation is more complicated
than the previous case, because the analog signal cannot  be reconstructed by
simply drawing straight lines between the data points.  Do these samples
properly represent the analog signal? The answer is yes, because no other
sinusoid, or combination of sinusoids, will produce this pattern of samples
(within the reasonable constraints listed below).  These samples correspond to
only one analog signal, and therefore the analog signal can be exactly
reconstructed.  Again, an instance of
proper sampling
.
In (c), the situation is made more difficult by increasing the sine wave's
frequency to 0.31 of the sampling rate.  This results in only 3.2 samples per sine
wave cycle.  Here the samples are so sparse that they don't even appear to
follow the general trend of the analog signal.  Do these samples properly
represent the analog waveform?  Again, the answer is yes, and for exactly the
same reason.  The samples are a unique representation of the analog signal.  All
of the information needed to reconstruct the continuous waveform is contained
in the digital data.  How you go about doing this  will be discussed later in this
chapter.  Obviously, it must be more sophisticated than just drawing straight
lines between the data points.  As strange as it seems, this is
proper sampling
according to our definition.
In (d), the analog frequency is pushed even higher to 0.95 of the sampling rate,
with a mere 1.05 samples per sine wave cycle.  Do these samples properly
represent the data?
No, they don't!
The samples represent a
different
sine wave
from the one contained in the analog signal. In particular, the original sine wave
of 0.95 frequency misrepresents itself as a sine wave of 0.05 frequency in the
digital signal.  This phenomenon of sinusoids changing frequency during
sampling is called
aliasing
.  Just as a criminal might take on an assumed name
or identity (an
alias
), the sinusoid assumes another frequency that is not its own. 
Since the digital data is no longer uniquely related to a particular analog signal,
an unambiguous reconstruction is impossible.  There is nothing in the sampled
data to suggest that the original analog signal had a frequency of 0.95 rather
than 0.05.  The sine wave has hidden its true identity completely; the perfect
crime has been committed!  According to our definition, this is an example of
improper sampling
.
This line of reasoning leads to a milestone in DSP, the
sampling theorem
. 
Frequently this is called the
Shannon
sampling theorem, or the
Nyquist
sampling
theorem, after the authors of 1940s papers on the topic. The sampling theorem
indicates that a continuous signal can be properly sampled,
only if it does not
contain frequency components above one-half of the sampling rate
.  For instance,
a sampling rate of 2,000 samples/second requires the analog signal to be
composed of frequencies below 1000 cycles/second.  If frequencies above this
limit
are
present in the signal, they will be aliased to frequencies between 0 and
1000 cycles/second, combining with whatever information that was legitimately
there.
Two terms are widely used when discussing the sampling theorem: the
Nyquist
frequency
and the
Nyquist rate
.  Unfortunately, their meaning is not
standardized.  To understand this, consider an analog signal composed of
frequencies between DC and 3 kHz.  To properly digitize this signal it must be
sampled at 6,000 samples/sec (6 kHz) or higher.  Suppose we choose to sample
at 8,000 samples/sec (8 kHz), allowing frequencies between DC and 4 kHz to
be properly represented.  In this situation their are four important frequencies:
(1) the highest frequency in the signal, 3 kHz; (2) twice this frequency, 6 kHz;
(3) the sampling rate, 8 kHz; and (4) one-half the sampling rate, 4 kHz.  Which
of these four is the
Nyquist frequency
and which is the
Nyquist rate
?  It depends
who you ask!   All of the possible combinations are used.  Fortunately, most
authors are careful to define how they are using the terms.  In this book, they are
both used to mean
one-half the sampling rate
.
Figure 3-4 shows how frequencies are changed during aliasing. The key point
to remember is that a digital signal
cannot
contain frequencies above one-half
the sampling rate (i.e., the Nyquist frequency/rate).  When the frequency of the
continuous wave is below the Nyquist rate, the frequency of the sampled data
is a match.  However, when the continuous signal's frequency is above the
Nyquist rate, aliasing
changes
the frequency into something that
can
be
represented in the sampled data.  As shown by the zigzagging line in Fig. 3-4,
every continuous frequency above the Nyquist rate has a corresponding digital
frequency between zero and one-half the sampling rate.  It there happens to be
a sinusoid already at this lower frequency, the aliased signal will add to it,
resulting in a loss of information.  Aliasing is a double curse; information can
be lost about the higher
and
the lower frequency.  Suppose you are given a
digital signal containing a frequency of 0.2 of the sampling rate.  If this signal
were obtained by proper sampling, the original analog signal
must
have had a
frequency of 0.2.  If aliasing took place during sampling, the digital frequency
of 0.2 could have come from any one of an infinite number of frequencies in the
analog signal:  0.2, 0.8, 1.2, 1.8, 2.2, … .
Just as aliasing can change the frequency during sampling, it can also change
the
phase
.  For example, look back at the aliased signal in Fig. 3-3d.  The
aliased digital signal is
inverted
from the original analog signal; one is a sine
wave while the other is a negative sine wave.  In other words, aliasing has
changed the frequency
and
introduced a 180? phase shift.  Only two phase shifts
are possible: 0? (no phase shift) and 180? (inversion).   The zero phase shift
occurs for analog frequencies of 0 to 0.5, 1.0 to 1.5, 2.0 to 2.5, etc.  An inverted
phase occurs for analog frequencies of 0.5 to 1.0, 1.5 to 2.0, 3.5 to 4.0, and so
on.
Now we will dive into a more detailed analysis of sampling and how aliasing
occurs.  Our overall goal is to understand what happens to the information 
when a signal is converted from a continuous to a discrete form.  The problem
is, these are very different things; one is a
continuous waveform
while the other
is an
array of numbers
.  This "apples-to-oranges" comparison makes the
analysis very difficult.  The solution is to introduce a theoretical concept called
the
impulse train
.
Figure 3-5a shows an example analog signal.  Figure (c) shows the signal
sampled by using an
impulse train
.  The impulse train is a continuous signal
consisting of a series of narrow spikes (impulses) that match the original signal
at the sampling instants.  Each impulse is infinitesimally narrow, a concept that
will be discussed in Chapter 13.  Between these sampling times the value of the
waveform is zero.  Keep in mind that the impulse train is a
theoretical
concept,
not a waveform that can exist in an electronic circuit. Since  both the original
analog signal and the impulse train are continuous waveforms, we can make an
"apples-apples" comparison between the two.
Now we need to examine the relationship between the impulse train and the 
discrete signal (an array of numbers).  This one is easy; in terms of
information
content
, they are
identical
.  If one is known, it is trivial to calculate the other. 
Think of these as different ends of a bridge crossing between the analog and
digital worlds.  This means we have achieved our overall goal once we
understand the consequences of changing the waveform in Fig. 3-5a into the
waveform in Fig. 3.5c.
Three continuous waveforms are shown in the left-hand column in Fig. 3-5. The
corresponding
frequency spectra
of these signals are displayed in the right-hand
column.   This should be a familiar concept from you knowledge of electronics;
every waveform can be viewed as being composed of sinusoids of varying
amplitude and frequency.  Later chapters will discuss the frequency domain in
detail.  (You may want to revisit this discussion after becoming more familiar
with frequency spectra).
Figure (a) shows an analog signal we wish to sample.  As indicated by its
frequency spectrum in (b), it is composed only of frequency components
between 0 and about 0.33 f>
s
, where f
s
is the sampling frequency we intend to
use.  For example, this might be a speech signal that has been filtered to remove
all frequencies above 3.3 kHz.  Correspondingly, f
s
would be 10 kHz (10,000
samples/second), our intended sampling rate.
Sampling the signal in (a) by using an impulse train produces the signal shown
in (c), and its frequency spectrum shown in (d).  This spectrum is a
duplication
of the spectrum of the original signal.  Each multiple of the sampling frequency,
f
s
, 2f
s
, 3f
s
, 4f
s
, etc., has received a
copy
and a
left-for-right flipped copy
of the
original frequency spectrum.  The copy is called the
upper sideband
, while the
flipped copy is called the
lower sideband
. Sampling has generated
new
frequencies.  Is this proper sampling?  The answer is yes, because the signal in
(c) can be transformed back into the signal in (a) by eliminating all frequencies
above ?f
s
.
That is, an analog low-pass filter will convert the impulse train, (b),
back into the original analog signal, (a).
If you are already familiar with the basics of DSP, here is a more technical
explanation of why this spectral duplication occurs.  (Ignore this paragraph if
you are new to DSP).  In the time domain, sampling is achieved by multiplying
the original signal by an impulse train of
unity amplitude
spikes.  The frequency
spectrum of this unity amplitude impulse train is also a unity amplitude impulse
train, with the spikes occurring at multiples of the sampling frequency, f
s
, 2f
s
,
3f
s
, 4f
s
, etc.  When two time domain signals are multiplied, their frequency
spectra are convolved.  This results in the original spectrum being duplicated
to the location of each spike in the impulse train's spectrum.  Viewing the
original signal as composed of both positive and negative frequencies accounts
for the upper and lower sidebands, respectively.  This is the same as amplitude
modulation, discussed in Chapter 10.
Figure (e) shows an example of
improper sampling
, resulting from too low of
sampling rate.  The analog signal still contains frequencies up to 3.3 kHz, but
the sampling rate has been lowered to 5 kHz.  Notice that  along the
horizontal axis are spaced closer in (f) than in (d).  The frequency spectrum, (f),
shows the problem: the duplicated portions of the spectrum have invaded the
band between zero and one-half of the sampling frequency.  Although (f) shows
these overlapping frequencies as retaining their separate identity, in actual
practice they add together forming a single confused mess.  Since there is no
way to separate the overlapping frequencies, information is lost, and the
original signal cannot be reconstructed.  This overlap occurs when the analog
signal contains frequencies greater than one-half the sampling rate, that is, we
have proven the sampling theorem.
Next Section:
Digital-to-Analog Conversion
Home
|
The Book by Chapters
|
About the Book
|
Steven W. Smith
|
Blog
|
Contact
Copyright © 1997-2011 by California Technical Publishing
var gaJsHost = (("https:" == document.location.protocol) ? "https://ssl." : "http://www.");
document.write(unescape("%3Cscript src='" + gaJsHost + "google-analytics.com/ga.js' type='text/javascript'%3E%3C/script%3E"));
try {
var pageTracker = _gat._getTracker("UA-1774944-11");
pageTracker._trackPageview();
} catch(err) {}