--- pdftotext -layout lines 1-25 ---
                                         Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2022) 1-40             Submitted 8/21; Revised 3/22; Published 4/22




                                          Switch Transformers: Scaling to Trillion Parameter Models
                                                     with Simple and Efficient Sparsity

                                         William Fedus∗
                                         liamfedus@google.com
                                         Barret Zoph∗
                                         barretzoph@google.com
arXiv:2101.03961v3 [cs.LG] 16 Jun 2022




                                         Noam Shazeer
                                         noam@google.com
                                         Google, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA


                                         Editor: Alexander Clark


--- pdftotext -layout lines 372-435 ---
                                                                  6
                                     Switch Transformers




    Distributed Switch Implementation. All of our tensor shapes are statically deter-
mined at compilation time, but our computation is dynamic due to the routing decisions at
training and inference. Because of this, one important technical consideration is how to set
the expert capacity. The expert capacity—the number of tokens each expert computes—is
set by evenly dividing the number of tokens in the batch across the number of experts, and
then further expanding by a capacity factor,
                                                      
                                      tokens per batch
                 expert capacity =                       × capacity factor.              (3)
                                     number of experts

A capacity factor greater than 1.0 creates additional buffer to accommodate for when to-
kens are not perfectly balanced across experts. If too many tokens are routed to an expert
(referred to later as dropped tokens), computation is skipped and the token representa-
tion is passed directly to the next layer through the residual connection. Increasing the
expert capacity is not without drawbacks, however, since high values will result in wasted
computation and memory. This trade-off is explained in Figure 3. Empirically we find en-
suring lower rates of dropped tokens are important for the scaling of sparse expert-models.
Throughout our experiments we didn’t notice any dependency on the number of experts
for the number of tokens dropped (typically < 1%). Using the auxiliary load balancing loss
(next section) with a high enough coefficient ensured good load balancing. We study the
impact that these design decisions have on model quality and speed in Table 1.
    A Differentiable Load Balancing Loss. To encourage a balanced load across experts
we add an auxiliary loss (Shazeer et al., 2017, 2018; Lepikhin et al., 2020). As in Shazeer
et al. (2018); Lepikhin et al. (2020), Switch Transformers simplifies the original design in
Shazeer et al. (2017) which had separate load-balancing and importance-weighting losses.
For each Switch layer, this auxiliary loss is added to the total model loss during training.
Given N experts indexed by i = 1 to N and a batch B with T tokens, the auxiliary loss is
computed as the scaled dot-product between vectors f and P ,
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                     loss = α · N ·         fi · Pi                                (4)
                                                      i=1

where fi is the fraction of tokens dispatched to expert i,
                                        1 X
                                 fi =       1{argmax p(x) = i}                                     (5)
                                        T
                                         x∈B

and Pi is the fraction of the router probability allocated for expert i, 2
                                                1 X
                                         Pi =       pi (x).                                        (6)
                                                T
                                                  x∈B

Since we seek uniform routing of the batch of tokens across the N experts, we desire both
vectors to have values of 1/N . The auxiliary loss of Equation 4 encourages uniform routing
since it is minimized under a uniform distribution. The objective can also be differentiated as
2. A potential source of confusion: pi (x) is the probability of routing token x to expert i. Pi is the
   probability fraction to expert i across all tokens in the batch B.


                                                  7
                                   Fedus, Zoph and Shazeer

