                          Figure 1: The Transformer - model architecture.


The Transformer follows this overall architecture using stacked self-attention and point-wise, fully
connected layers for both the encoder and decoder, shown in the left and right halves of Figure 1,
respectively.

3.1   Encoder and Decoder Stacks

Encoder: The encoder is composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. Each layer has two
sub-layers. The first is a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second is a simple, position-
wise fully connected feed-forward network. We employ a residual connection [11] around each of
the two sub-layers, followed by layer normalization [1]. That is, the output of each sub-layer is
LayerNorm(x + Sublayer(x)), where Sublayer(x) is the function implemented by the sub-layer
itself. To facilitate these residual connections, all sub-layers in the model, as well as the embedding
layers, produce outputs of dimension dmodel = 512.

Decoder: The decoder is also composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. In addition to the two
sub-layers in each encoder layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head
attention over the output of the encoder stack. Similar to the encoder, we employ residual connections
around each of the sub-layers, followed by layer normalization. We also modify the self-attention
sub-layer in the decoder stack to prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions. This
masking, combined with fact that the output embeddings are offset by one position, ensures that the
predictions for position i can depend only on the known outputs at positions less than i.

3.2   Attention

An attention function can be described as mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs to an output,
where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors. The output is computed as a weighted sum


                                                  3
           Scaled Dot-Product Attention                                  Multi-Head Attention




Figure 2: (left) Scaled Dot-Product Attention. (right) Multi-Head Attention consists of several
attention layers running in parallel.


of the values, where the weight assigned to each value is computed by a compatibility function of the
query with the corresponding key.

3.2.1   Scaled Dot-Product Attention
We call our particular attention "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" (Figure 2). The input consists of
queries and keys of dimension dk , and
                                    √ values of dimension dv . We compute the dot products of the
query with all keys, divide each by dk , and apply a softmax function to obtain the weights on the
values.
In practice, we compute the attention function on a set of queries simultaneously, packed together
into a matrix Q. The keys and values are also packed together into matrices K and V . We compute
the matrix of outputs as:

                                                              QK T
                                Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax( √ )V                                           (1)
                                                                dk
The two most commonly used attention functions are additive attention [2], and dot-product (multi-
plicative) attention. Dot-product attention is identical to our algorithm, except for the scaling factor
of √1d . Additive attention computes the compatibility function using a feed-forward network with
      k
a single hidden layer. While the two are similar in theoretical complexity, dot-product attention is
much faster and more space-efficient in practice, since it can be implemented using highly optimized
matrix multiplication code.
While for small values of dk the two mechanisms perform similarly, additive attention outperforms
dot product attention without scaling for larger values of dk [3]. We suspect that for large values of
dk , the dot products grow large in magnitude, pushing the softmax function into regions where it has
extremely small gradients 4 . To counteract this effect, we scale the dot products by √1d .
                                                                                                  k



3.2.2   Multi-Head Attention
Instead of performing a single attention function with dmodel -dimensional keys, values and queries,
we found it beneficial to linearly project the queries, keys and values h times with different, learned
linear projections to dk , dk and dv dimensions, respectively. On each of these projected versions of
queries, keys and values we then perform the attention function in parallel, yielding dv -dimensional
   4
     To illustrate why the dot products get large, assume that the components of q and k are independent random
variables with mean 0 and variance 1. Then their dot product, q · k = di=1
                                                                        P k
                                                                              qi ki , has mean 0 and variance dk .


                                                        4
output values. These are concatenated and once again projected, resulting in the final values, as
depicted in Figure 2.
Multi-head attention allows the model to jointly attend to information from different representation
subspaces at different positions. With a single attention head, averaging inhibits this.


                      MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1 , ..., headh )W O
                                where headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , V WiV )



Where the projections are parameter matrices WiQ ∈ Rdmodel ×dk , WiK ∈ Rdmodel ×dk , WiV ∈ Rdmodel ×dv
and W O ∈ Rhdv ×dmodel .
In this work we employ h = 8 parallel attention layers, or heads. For each of these we use
dk = dv = dmodel /h = 64. Due to the reduced dimension of each head, the total computational cost
is similar to that of single-head attention with full dimensionality.

3.2.3    Applications of Attention in our Model
The Transformer uses multi-head attention in three different ways:

         • In "encoder-decoder attention" layers, the queries come from the previous decoder layer,
           and the memory keys and values come from the output of the encoder. This allows every
           position in the decoder to attend over all positions in the input sequence. This mimics the
           typical encoder-decoder attention mechanisms in sequence-to-sequence models such as
           [38, 2, 9].
         • The encoder contains self-attention layers. In a self-attention layer all of the keys, values
           and queries come from the same place, in this case, the output of the previous layer in the
           encoder. Each position in the encoder can attend to all positions in the previous layer of the
           encoder.
         • Similarly, self-attention layers in the decoder allow each position in the decoder to attend to
           all positions in the decoder up to and including that position. We need to prevent leftward
           information flow in the decoder to preserve the auto-regressive property. We implement this
           inside of scaled dot-product attention by masking out (setting to −∞) all values in the input
           of the softmax which correspond to illegal connections. See Figure 2.

3.3     Position-wise Feed-Forward Networks

In addition to attention sub-layers, each of the layers in our encoder and decoder contains a fully
connected feed-forward network, which is applied to each position separately and identically. This
consists of two linear transformations with a ReLU activation in between.

                                 FFN(x) = max(0, xW1 + b1 )W2 + b2                                     (2)

While the linear transformations are the same across different positions, they use different parameters
from layer to layer. Another way of describing this is as two convolutions with kernel size 1.
The dimensionality of input and output is dmodel = 512, and the inner-layer has dimensionality
df f = 2048.

3.4     Embeddings and Softmax

Similarly to other sequence transduction models, we use learned embeddings to convert the input
tokens and output tokens to vectors of dimension dmodel . We also use the usual learned linear transfor-
mation and softmax function to convert the decoder output to predicted next-token probabilities. In
our model, we share the same weight matrix between the two embedding layers and the pre-softmax√
linear transformation, similar to [30]. In the embedding layers, we multiply those weights by dmodel .


                                                     5
