                                         FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention
                                                          with IO-Awareness
                                                 Tri Dao† , Daniel Y. Fu† , Stefano Ermon† , Atri Rudra‡ , and Christopher Ré†
                                                               † Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
                                               ‡ Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
arXiv:2205.14135v2 [cs.LG] 23 Jun 2022




                                                 {trid,danfu}@cs.stanford.edu, ermon@stanford.edu, atri@buffalo.edu,
                                                                     chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

                                                                                         June 24, 2022

                                                                                            Abstract
                                                  Transformers are slow and memory-hungry on long sequences, since the time and memory complexity
                                              of self-attention are quadratic in sequence length. Approximate attention methods have attempted
                                              to address this problem by trading off model quality to reduce the compute complexity, but often do
                                              not achieve wall-clock speedup. We argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IO-
                                              aware—accounting for reads and writes between levels of GPU memory. We propose FlashAttention,
                                              an IO-aware exact attention algorithm that uses tiling to reduce the number of memory reads/writes
                                              between GPU high bandwidth memory (HBM) and GPU on-chip SRAM. We analyze the IO complexity
                                              of FlashAttention, showing that it requires fewer HBM accesses than standard attention, and is
                                              optimal for a range of SRAM sizes. We also extend FlashAttention to block-sparse attention, yielding
                                              an approximate attention algorithm that is faster than any existing approximate attention method.
                                              FlashAttention trains Transformers faster than existing baselines: 15% end-to-end wall-clock speedup
                                              on BERT-large (seq. length 512) compared to the MLPerf 1.1 training speed record, 3× speedup on
                                              GPT-2 (seq. length 1K), and 2.4× speedup on long-range arena (seq. length 1K-4K). FlashAttention
                                              and block-sparse FlashAttention enable longer context in Transformers, yielding higher quality models
                                              (0.7 better perplexity on GPT-2 and 6.4 points of lift on long-document classification) and entirely new
                                              capabilities: the first Transformers to achieve better-than-chance performance on the Path-X challenge
                                              (seq. length 16K, 61.4% accuracy) and Path-256 (seq. length 64K, 63.1% accuracy).


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Transformer models [82] have emerged as the most widely used architecture in applications such as natural
                                         language processing and image classification. Transformers have grown larger [5] and deeper [83], but
                                         equipping them with longer context remains difficult [80], since the self-attention module at their heart
                                         has time and memory complexity quadratic in sequence length. An important question is whether making
                                         attention faster and more memory-efficient can help Transformer models address their runtime and memory
                                         challenges for long sequences.
                                             Many approximate attention methods have aimed to reduce the compute and memory requirements of
                                         attention. These methods range from sparse-approximation [51, 74] to low-rank approximation [12, 50, 84],
                                         and their combinations [3, 9, 92]. Although these methods reduce the compute requirements to linear or
                                         near-linear in sequence length, many of them do not display wall-clock speedup against standard attention
                                         and have not gained wide adoption. One main reason is that they focus on FLOP reduction (which may not
                                         correlate with wall-clock speed) and tend to ignore overheads from memory access (IO).
                                             In this paper, we argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IO-aware [1]—that is,
                                         carefully accounting for reads and writes to different levels of fast and slow memory (e.g., between fast GPU
                                         on-chip SRAM and relatively slow GPU high bandwidth memory, or HBM [45], Figure 1 left). On modern


                                                                                                 1
                                                                                          Outer Loop

                                                                    KT: d x N
                                                                                                                                                                      Attention on GPT-2
                                                                                          Copy Block to SRAM

                                                               Q: N x d
                                                                                               Outer Loop
                                                                                                                             V: N X d                                          Matmul
                                                                                                                                                             15




                                                                          QKT: N x N
                  GPU   SRAM: 19 TB/s (20 MB)                                                                                                                                  Dropout
                 SRAM




                                                                                                                                                     Time (ms)
                GPU       HBM: 1.5 TB/s (40 GB)                                                                 Copy                                         10




                                                                                                                                        Outer Loop
                                                  Inner Loop
                HBM                                                                       Compute Block                                                                        Softmax
                                                                                            on SRAM




                                                                                                                Inner Loop
                                                                      Copy
            Main Memory        DRAM: 12.8 GB/s                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                          Fused
            (CPU DRAM)               (>1 TB)                                                                                                                                   Mask       Kernel

                                                                                                                                                                               Matmul
             Memory Hierarchy with                                                              Output to HBM                                                    0
            Bandwidth & Memory Size                  sm(QKT)V: N x d
                                                                                                                                                                     PyTorch          FlashAttention

                                                                                          Inner Loop
                                                                                       FlashAttention

Figure 1: Left: FlashAttention uses tiling to prevent materialization of the large 𝑁 × 𝑁 attention matrix
(dotted box) on (relatively) slow GPU HBM. In the outer loop (red arrows), FlashAttention loops through
blocks of the K and V matrices and loads them to fast on-chip SRAM. In each block, FlashAttention
loops over blocks of Q matrix (blue arrows), loading them to SRAM, and writing the output of the attention
computation back to HBM. Right: Speedup over the PyTorch implementation of attention on GPT-2.
FlashAttention does not read and write the large 𝑁 × 𝑁 attention matrix to HBM, resulting in an 7.6×
speedup on the attention computation.


GPUs, compute speed has out-paced memory speed [61, 62, 63], and most operations in Transformers are
bottlenecked by memory accesses [43]. IO-aware algorithms have been critical for similar memory-bound
operations, when reading and writing data can account for a large portion of the runtime—such as database
joins [71], image processing [70], numerical linear algebra [4], and more [40, 85]. However, common Python
interfaces to deep learning such as PyTorch and Tensorflow do not allow fine-grained control of memory
access.
    We propose FlashAttention, a new attention algorithm that computes exact attention with far fewer
memory accesses. Our main goal is to avoid reading and writing the attention matrix to and from HBM.
This requires (i) computing the softmax reduction without access to the whole input (ii) not storing the large
intermediate attention matrix for the backward pass. We apply two well-established techniques to address
these challenges. (i) We restructure the attention computation to split the input into blocks and make several
passes over input blocks, thus incrementally performing the softmax reduction (also known as tiling). (ii) We
store the softmax normalization factor from the forward pass to quickly recompute attention on-chip in the
backward pass, which is faster than the standard approach of reading the intermediate attention matrix from
HBM. We implement FlashAttention in CUDA to achieve fine-grained control over memory access and
fuse all the attention operations into one GPU kernel. Even with the increased FLOPs due to recomputation,
our algorithm both runs faster (up to 7.6x on GPT-2 [67], Figure 1 right) and uses less memory—linear
in sequence length—than standard attention, thanks to the massively reduced amount of HBM access.
    We analyze the IO complexity [1] of FlashAttention, proving that it requires 𝑂 (𝑁 2 𝑑 2 𝑀 −1 ) HBM
accesses where 𝑑 is the head dimension and 𝑀 is the size of SRAM, as compared to Ω(𝑁 𝑑 + 𝑁 2 ) of standard
attention. For typical values of 𝑑 and 𝑀, FlashAttention requires many times fewer HBM accesses
compared to standard attention (up to 9× fewer, as shown in Fig. 2). Moreover, we provide a lower bound,
showing that no exact attention algorithm can asymptotically improve on the number of HBM accesses over
all SRAM sizes.
    We also show that FlashAttention can serve as a useful primitive for realizing the potential of
approximate attention algorithms by overcoming their issues with memory access overhead. As a proof of
concept, we implement block-sparse FlashAttention, a sparse attention algorithm that is 2-4× faster than
even FlashAttention, scaling up to sequence length of 64k. We prove that block-sparse FlashAttention
has better IO complexity than FlashAttention by a factor proportional to the sparsity ratio. We discuss
further extensions to other operations (attention on multi-GPU, kernel regression, block-sparse matrix




                                                                                           2
multiply) in Section 5. We open-source FlashAttention to make it easier to build on this primitive.1
    We empirically validate that FlashAttention speeds up model training and improves model quality by
modeling longer context. We also benchmark the runtime and memory footprint of FlashAttention and
block-sparse FlashAttention compared to prior attention implementations.
• Faster Model Training. FlashAttention trains Transformer models faster in wall-clock time. We
  train BERT-large (seq. length 512) 15% faster than the training speed record in MLPerf 1.1 [58], GPT2
  (seq. length 1K) 3× faster than baseline implementations from HuggingFace [87] and Megatron-LM [77],
  and long-range arena (seq. length 1K-4K) 2.4× faster than baselines.
• Higher Quality Models. FlashAttention scales Transformers to longer sequences, which improves
  their quality and enables new capabilities. We observe a 0.7 improvement in perplexity on GPT-2 and
  6.4 points of lift from modeling longer sequences on long-document classification [13]. FlashAttention
  enables the first Transformer that can achieve better-than-chance performance on the Path-X [80] challenge,
  solely from using a longer sequence length (16K). Block-sparse FlashAttention enables a Transformer
  to scale to even longer sequences (64K), resulting in the first model that can achieve better-than-chance
  performance on Path-256.
• Benchmarking Attention. FlashAttention is up to 3× faster than the standard attention implemen-
  tation across common sequence lengths from 128 to 2K and scales up to 64K. Up to sequence length of 512,
  FlashAttention is both faster and more memory-efficient than any existing attention method, whereas
  for sequence length beyond 1K, some approximate attention methods (e.g., Linformer) start to become
  faster. On the other hand, block-sparse FlashAttention is faster than all existing approximate attention
  methods that we know of.


2      Background
We provide some background on the performance characteristics of common deep learning operations on
modern hardware (GPUs). We also describe the standard implementation of attention.

2.1     Hardware Performance
We focus here on GPUs. Performance on other hardware accelerators are similar [46, 48].
    GPU Memory Hierarchy. The GPU memory hierarchy (Fig. 1 left) comprises multiple forms of
memory of different sizes and speeds, with smaller memory being faster. As an example, the A100 GPU
has 40-80GB of high bandwidth memory (HBM) with bandwidth 1.5-2.0TB/s and 192KB of on-chip SRAM
per each of 108 streaming multiprocessors with bandwidth estimated around 19TB/s [44, 45]. The on-chip
SRAM is an order of magnitude faster than HBM but many orders of magnitude smaller in size. As compute
has gotten faster relative to memory speed [61, 62, 63], operations are increasingly bottlenecked by memory
(HBM) accesses. Thus exploiting fast SRAM becomes more important.
    Execution Model. GPUs have a massive number of threads to execute an operation (called a kernel).
Each kernel loads inputs from HBM to registers and SRAM, computes, then writes outputs to HBM.
    Performance characteristics. Depending on the balance of computation and memory accesses, op-
erations can be classified as either compute-bound or memory-bound. This is commonly measured by the
arithmetic intensity [85], which is the number of arithmetic operations per byte of memory access.
1. Compute-bound: the time taken by the operation is determined by how many arithmetic operations there
   are, while time accessing HBM is much smaller. Typical examples are matrix multiply with large inner
   dimension, and convolution with large number of channels.
2. Memory-bound: the time taken by the operation is determined by the number of memory accesses, while
   time spent in computation is much smaller. Examples include most other operations: elementwise (e.g.,
   activation, dropout), and reduction (e.g., sum, softmax, batch norm, layer norm).
    Kernel fusion. The most common approach to accelerate memory-bound operations is kernel fusion: if
there are multiple operations applied to the same input, the input can be loaded once from HBM, instead of
multiple times for each operation. Compilers can automatically fuse many elementwise operations [53, 65, 75].
    1 FlashAttention code is available at https://github.com/HazyResearch/flash-attention




                                                          3
However, in the context of model training, the intermediate values still need to be written to HBM to save
for the backward pass, reducing the effectiveness of naive kernel fusion.

2.2    Standard Attention Implementation
Given input sequences Q, K, V ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 where 𝑁 is the sequence length and 𝑑 is the head dimension, we want
to compute the attention output O ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 :

                      S = QK> ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑁 ,         P = softmax(S) ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑁 ,         O = PV ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 ,

where softmax is applied row-wise.
    Standard attention implementations materialize the matrices S and P to HBM, which takes 𝑂 (𝑁 2 ) memory.
Often 𝑁  𝑑 (e.g., for GPT2, 𝑁 = 1024 and 𝑑 = 64). We describe the standard attention implementation
in Algorithm 0. As some or most of the operations are memory-bound (e.g., softmax), the large number of
memory accesses translates to slow wall-clock time.
    This problem is exacerbated by other elementwise operations applied to the attention matrix, such as
masking applied to S or dropout applied to P. As a result, there have been many attempts to fuse several
elementwise operations, such as fusing masking with softmax [77].
    In Section 3.2, we will show that the standard attention implementation performs HBM accesses quadratic
in the sequence length 𝑁. We also compare the number of FLOPs and number of HBM accesses of standard
attention and of our method (FlashAttention).

Algorithm 0 Standard Attention Implementation
Require: Matrices Q, K, V ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 in HBM.
 1: Load Q, K by blocks from HBM, compute S = QK> , write S to HBM.
 2: Read S from HBM, compute P = softmax(S), write P to HBM.
 3: Load P and V by blocks from HBM, compute O = PV, write O to HBM.
 4: Return O.



3     FlashAttention: Algorithm, Analysis, and Extensions
We show how to compute exact attention with fewer HBM reads/writes and without storing large intermediate
matrices for the backward pass. This yields an attention algorithm that is both memory efficient and faster in
wall-clock time. We analyze its IO complexity, showing that our method requires much fewer HBM accesses
compared to standard attention. We further show that FlashAttention can serve as a useful primitive by
extending it to handle block-sparse attention.
   We focus here on the forward pass for ease of exposition; Appendix B contains details for the backward.

3.1    An Efficient Attention Algorithm With Tiling and Recomputation
Given the inputs Q, K, V ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 in HBM, we aim to compute the attention output O ∈ R 𝑁 ×𝑑 and write it to
HBM. Our goal is to reduce the amount of HBM accesses (to sub-quadratic in 𝑁).
    We apply two established techniques (tiling, recomputation) to overcome the technical challenge of
computing exact attention in sub-quadratic HBM accesses. We describe this in Algorithm 1. The main idea
is that we split the inputs Q, K, V into blocks, load them from slow HBM to fast SRAM, then compute the
attention output with respect to those blocks. By scaling the output of each block by the right normalization
factor before adding them up, we get the correct result at the end.
    Tiling. We compute attention by blocks. Softmax couples columns of K, so we decompose the large
softmax with scaling [51, 60, 66]. For numerical stability, the softmax of vector 𝑥 ∈ R 𝐵 is computed as:
                                                                                   ∑︁                              𝑓 (𝑥)
                          𝑓 (𝑥) := 𝑒 𝑥1 −𝑚( 𝑥)           𝑒 𝑥𝐵 −𝑚( 𝑥) ,
                                                                   
      𝑚(𝑥) := max 𝑥 𝑖 ,                            ...                   ℓ(𝑥) :=        𝑓 (𝑥)𝑖 ,   softmax(𝑥) :=         .
                𝑖
                                                                                    𝑖
                                                                                                                   ℓ(𝑥)




                                                             4
