
--- original onnx-quantization.txt lines 11-22 ---
Quantization Overview
Quantization in ONNX Runtime refers to 8 bit linear quantization of an ONNX model.
During quantization, the floating point values are mapped to an 8 bit quantization space of the form:
val_fp32 = scale * (val_quantized - zero_point)
scale
is a positive real number used to map the floating point numbers to a quantization space. It is calculated as follows:
For asymmetric quantization:
scale = (data_range_max - data_range_min) / (quantization_range_max - quantization_range_min)
For symmetric quantization:
scale = max(abs(data_range_max), abs(data_range_min)) * 2 / (quantization_range_max - quantization_range_min)
zero_point
represents zero in the quantization space. It is important that the floating point zero value be exactly representable in quantization space. This is because zero padding is used in many CNNs. If it is not possible to represent 0 uniquely after quantization, it will result in accuracy errors.

--- original onnx-quantization.txt lines 137-142 ---
ONNX Runtime quantization on CPU can run U8U8, U8S8 and S8S8. S8S8 with QDQ is the default setting and balances performance and accuracy. It should be the first choice. Only in cases that the accuracy drops a lot, you can try U8U8. Note that S8S8 with QOperator will be slow on x86-64 CPUs and should be avoided in general. ONNX Runtime quantization on GPU only supports S8S8.
When and why do I need to try U8U8?
On x86-64 machines with AVX2 and AVX512 extensions, ONNX Runtime uses the VPMADDUBSW instruction for U8S8 for performance. This instruction might suffer from saturation issues: it can happen that the output does not fit into a 16-bit integer and has to be clamped (saturated) to fit. Generally, this is not a big issue for the final result. However, if you do encounter a large accuracy drop, it may be caused by saturation. In this case, you can either try
reduce_range
or the U8U8 format which doesn’t have saturation issues.
There is no such issue on other CPU architectures (x64 with VNNI and Arm®).

--- original onnx-quantization.txt lines 156-158 ---
Quantization on GPU
Hardware support is required to achieve better performance with quantization on GPUs. You need a device that supports Tensor Core int8 computation, like T4 or A100. Older hardware will not benefit from quantization.
ONNX Runtime leverages the TensorRT Execution Provider for quantization on GPU now. Unlike the CPU Execution Provider, TensorRT takes in a full precision model and a calibration result for inputs. It decides how to quantize with their own logic. The overall procedure to leverage TensorRT EP quantization is:

--- original onnx-quantization.txt lines 330-333 ---
FAQ
Why am I not seeing performance improvements?
The performance improvement depends on your model and hardware. The performance gain from quantization has two aspects: compute and memory. Old hardware has none or few of the instructions needed to perform efficient inference in int8. And quantization has overhead (from quantizing and dequantizing), so it is not rare to get worse performance on old devices.
x86-64 with VNNI, GPU with Tensor Core int8 support and Arm®-based processors with dot-product instructions can get better performance in general.
