                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021




                                         E XTENDING C ONTEXT W INDOW OF L ARGE L AN -
                                         GUAGE M ODELS VIA P OSITION I NTERPOLATION

                                          Shouyuan Chen       Sherman Wong Liangjian Chen Yuandong Tian
                                          Meta Platforms Inc.
                                          {chenshouyuan,shermanwong,clj,yuandong}@meta.com



                                                                                     A BSTRACT
arXiv:2306.15595v1 [cs.CL] 27 Jun 2023




                                                  We present Position Interpolation (PI) that extends the context window sizes of
                                                  RoPE-based (Su et al., 2021) pretrained LLMs such as LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
                                                  2023) models to up to 32768 with minimal fine-tuning (within 1000 steps), while
                                                  demonstrating strong empirical results on various tasks that require long context,
                                                  including passkey retrieval, language modeling, and long document summariza-
                                                  tion from LLaMA 7B to 65B. Meanwhile, the extended model by Position Inter-
                                                  polation preserve quality relatively well on tasks within its original context win-
                                                  dow. To achieve this goal, Position Interpolation linearly down-scales the input
                                                  position indices to match the original context window size, rather than extrapo-
                                                  lating beyond the trained context length which may lead to catastrophically high
                                                  attention scores that completely ruin the self-attention mechanism. Our theoretical
                                                  study shows that the upper bound of interpolation is at least ∼ 600× smaller than
                                                  that of extrapolation, further demonstrating its stability. Models extended via Po-
                                                  sition Interpolation retain its original architecture and can reuse most pre-existing
                                                  optimization and infrastructure.


                                         1   I NTRODUCTION

                                         Large language models (LLMs) typically come with a pre-defined context window size. For exam-
                                         ple, inputs to LLaMA models (Touvron et al., 2023) must be fewer than 2048 tokens. This pre-set
                                         context window limit is frequently exceeded in applications such as conducting long conversations,
                                         summarizing long documents, or executing long-term planning. For these applications, LLMs with
                                         longer context windows are preferred. However, training an LLM from scratch with long context
                                         windows requires significant investments. This naturally leads to a question: Can we extend the
                                         context window of an existing pre-trained LLM?
                                         One straightforward approach is to fine-tune an existing pre-trained Transformer with a longer con-
                                         text window. However, empirically, we found that models trained this way adapt to long context
                                         windows very slowly. After training for more than 10000 batches, the effective context window
                                         saw a minimal increase, moving from 2048 to 2560 (Table 4). This suggests that such method is
                                         inefficient for extending to substantially longer context windows.
                                         While certain techniques such as ALiBi (Press et al., 2022) and LeX (Sun et al., 2022) enable length
                                         extrapolation of Transformers, i.e. train on short context windows and inference on longer ones,
                                         many existing pre-trained LLMs, including LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), use positional encodings
                                         that have weak extrapolation properties (e.g., RoPE (Su et al., 2021)). Therefore, the applicability
                                         of these techniques for extending the context window sizes of such LLMs remains limited.
                                         In this work, we introduce Position Interpolation to enable context window extensions for certain
                                         existing pre-trained LLMs, including LLaMA. The key idea is, instead of extrapolation, we directly
                                         down-scale the position indices so that the maximum position index matches the previous context
                                         window limit in the pre-training stage. See Figure 1 for an illustration. In other words, to accom-
                                         modate more input tokens, we interpolate the position encodings at neighboring integer positions,
                                         utilizing the fact that position encodings can be applied on non-integer positions, as opposed to
                                         extrapolating outside the trained positions, which may lead to catastrophic values. We verify our
                                         approach theoretically, by showing that the interpolated attention score has a much smaller upper


                                                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021




                     Pre-trained range                                    Unseen Range




                          Normal                                           Extrapolation




                     Pre-trained range




                   Position Interpolation
                    f’(x, m) = f(x, m/2)




Figure 1: An illustration of our Position Interpolation method. Consider a Llama model pre-trained with a
2048 context window length. Upper left illustrates the normal usage of an LLM model: input position indices
(blue dots) are within the pre-trained range. Upper right illustrates length extrapolation where models are
required to operate unseen positions (red dots) up to 4096. Lower left illustrates Position Interpolation where
we downscale the position indices (blue and green dots) themselves from [0, 4096] to [0, 2048] to force them
to reside in the pretrained range.


bound (∼ 600× smaller in LLaMA 7B setting) than the extrapolated one, and is thus much more
stable. Therefore, interpolated position encodings are easier for the model to adapt.
Empirically, we found that Position Interpolation is highly effective and efficient, requiring only a
very short period of fine-tuning for the model to fully adapt to greatly extended context windows.
We present experimental results for extending the context window to up to 32768 from the initial
2048 across 7B to 65B LLaMA models using Position Interpolation. Our results show that

      1. Position Interpolation can easily enable very long context windows (e.g. 32768), requiring
         only fine-tuning for 1000 steps on the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) to achieve a good quality.
         The cost of fine-tuning is negligible compared to the pre-training costs. This confirms
         our hypothesis that it is relatively easy for the models to adapt to interpolated position
         encodings.
      2. Position Interpolation generates strong models that can effectively make use of much ex-
         tended context window. We show that models extended by Position Interpolation enjoy
         significant perplexity gains from greatly extended context windows for text modeling, and
         we show that the perplexity reduces graceful with the enlargement of context windows.
         We also applied Position Interpolation in a long text summarization task, and demonstrate
         competitive performances.
      3. Position Interpolation preserves model quality relatively well for tasks within its original
         context window sizes. We present a variety of evaluation results for the extended LLaMA
         models on the original LLaMA benchmark. Compared with original LLaMA models, the
         extended LLaMA models saw a minor degradation on several standard benchmarks within
         a 2048 token limit.

Our results highlight the innate ability of Transformer models to “extrapolate to sequence lengths
longer than the ones encountered during training” as hypothesized in the seminal work of Vaswani
et al. (2017). We reaffirm this hypothesis and suggest that the previously known weakness of ex-
trapolating to longer sequences for language modeling (Press et al., 2022) may be due to direct


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021




extrapolation of positional encodings and it can be largely mitigated by interpolating position en-
codings instead.
Concurrent work. Right before our release, we are informed with a concurrent blogpost (Super-
HOT kaiokendev (2023)) that also interpolates positional encoding in RoPE to extend the context
window from 2K to 8K. Recently, open source community picks it up in Reddit post 1 and Github
Issues 2 , which shows that fine-tuning with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) also seems to work well. Our
paper shows a full fine-tuning with up to 65B model work well with Position Interpolation, and we
also give theoretical explanations why interpolation achieves much more stable results than extrap-
olation, by showing that the upper bound of interplated attention score is much lower than that of
extrapolated ones.

2     M ETHOD
2.1   BACKGROUND : ROTARY P OSITION E MBEDDING (RO PE)

Transformer models require explicit positional information to be injected, typically in the form of
positional encodings, to represent the order of inputs. We consider Rotary Position Embedding
(RoPE) (Su et al., 2021), which is the position encoding used in the LLaMA model (Touvron et al.,
2023). Given a position index m ∈ [0, c) and an embedding vector x := [x0 , x1 , . . . , xd−1 ]⊤ , where
d is the dimension of the attention head, RoPE defines a vector-valued complex function f (x, m) as
follows
          f (x, m) = [(x0 + ix1 )eimθ0 , (x2 + ix3 )eimθ1 , . . . , (xd−2 + ixd−1 )eimθd/2−1 ]⊤ (1)
            √
where i := −1 is the imaginary unit and θj = 10000−2j/d . Using RoPE, the self-attention score
a(m, n)    =    Re⟨f (q, m), f (k, n)⟩
                                                                 
                     d/2−1
                      X
           =    Re       (q2j + iq2j+1 )(k2j − ik2j+1 )ei(m−n)θj 
                        j=0
                d/2−1
                 X
           =            (q2j k2j + q2j+1 k2j+1 ) cos((m − n)θj ) + (q2j k2j+1 − q2j+1 k2j ) sin((m − n)θj )
                 j=0
           =: a(m − n)                                                                                     (2)
is only dependent on relative position m − n through trigonometric functions. Here q and k are the
query and key vector for a specific attention head. At each layer, RoPE is applied on both query and
key embeddings for computing attention scores.

2.2   D IRECT E XTRAPOLATION

While the attention score in RoPE only depends on the relative positions, which is what we want,
its extrapolation performance is not great . In particular, when directly extending to larger context
windows unseen in the training, the perplexity may shoot up to very high numbers (i.e., > 103 ),
comparable to untrained models.
Ideally, we want to see the model trained on a context window of size L = 2048 to still work
reasonably well on longer context window, but may not have the capability to leverage information
that appears beyond L. For example, to answer a question located at 3000, the model trained on
maximal window size of L = 2048 cannot leverage evidences provided at location 0, but still
can leverage the evidences provided at location 2900. In contrast, in reality we see catastrophic
behaviors, i.e., question at location 3000 cannot be answered correctly, even if the evidences are
located at location 2900.
What is the reason behind? How could this happen if the attention score am−n decays as the relative
distance |m − n| increases, according to Section 3.4.3 of (Su et al., 2021), and content from very
  1
    https://www.reddit.com/r/LocalLLaMA/comments/14fgjqj/a_simple_way_to_
extending_context_to_8k/
  2
    https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/discussions/1965


                                                   3
