                                                            Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
                                                             Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks


                                                                             Patrick Lewis†‡ , Ethan Perez? ,

                                             Aleksandra Piktus† , Fabio Petroni† , Vladimir Karpukhin† , Naman Goyal† , Heinrich Küttler† ,
arXiv:2005.11401v4 [cs.CL] 12 Apr 2021




                                                 Mike Lewis† , Wen-tau Yih† , Tim Rocktäschel†‡ , Sebastian Riedel†‡ , Douwe Kiela†

                                                     †
                                                         Facebook AI Research; ‡ University College London; ? New York University;
                                                                                    plewis@fb.com



                                                                                       Abstract

                                                   Large pre-trained language models have been shown to store factual knowledge
                                                   in their parameters, and achieve state-of-the-art results when fine-tuned on down-
                                                   stream NLP tasks. However, their ability to access and precisely manipulate knowl-
                                                   edge is still limited, and hence on knowledge-intensive tasks, their performance
                                                   lags behind task-specific architectures. Additionally, providing provenance for their
                                                   decisions and updating their world knowledge remain open research problems. Pre-
                                                   trained models with a differentiable access mechanism to explicit non-parametric
                                                   memory have so far been only investigated for extractive downstream tasks. We
                                                   explore a general-purpose fine-tuning recipe for retrieval-augmented generation
                                                   (RAG) — models which combine pre-trained parametric and non-parametric mem-
                                                   ory for language generation. We introduce RAG models where the parametric
                                                   memory is a pre-trained seq2seq model and the non-parametric memory is a dense
                                                   vector index of Wikipedia, accessed with a pre-trained neural retriever. We com-
                                                   pare two RAG formulations, one which conditions on the same retrieved passages
                                                   across the whole generated sequence, and another which can use different passages
                                                   per token. We fine-tune and evaluate our models on a wide range of knowledge-
                                                   intensive NLP tasks and set the state of the art on three open domain QA tasks,
                                                   outperforming parametric seq2seq models and task-specific retrieve-and-extract
                                                   architectures. For language generation tasks, we find that RAG models generate
                                                   more specific, diverse and factual language than a state-of-the-art parametric-only
                                                   seq2seq baseline.


                                         1     Introduction

                                         Pre-trained neural language models have been shown to learn a substantial amount of in-depth knowl-
                                         edge from data [47]. They can do so without any access to an external memory, as a parameterized
                                         implicit knowledge base [51, 52]. While this development is exciting, such models do have down-
                                         sides: They cannot easily expand or revise their memory, can’t straightforwardly provide insight into
                                         their predictions, and may produce “hallucinations” [38]. Hybrid models that combine parametric
                                         memory with non-parametric (i.e., retrieval-based) memories [20, 26, 48] can address some of these
                                         issues because knowledge can be directly revised and expanded, and accessed knowledge can be
                                         inspected and interpreted. REALM [20] and ORQA [31], two recently introduced models that
                                         combine masked language models [8] with a differentiable retriever, have shown promising results,
 Define "middle ear"(x)                                                                                            The middle ear includes
                                                 End-to-End Backprop through q and pθ                              the tympanic cavity and
     Question Answering:                                                                                           the three ossicles. (y)
       Question Query           Query           Retriever pη         Document                 Generator pθ             Question Answering:
                                                                                                                       Answer Generation
                               Encoder          (Non-Parametric)
                                                                       Index
                                                                                                (Parametric)
    Barack Obama was
                                                                   d(z)                                                 supports (y)
    born in Hawaii.(x)                   q(x)                                            z4

Fact Veriﬁcation: Fact Query                                                        z3                   Margin-        Fact Veriﬁcation:
                                                                               z2                                       Label Generation
                                                                                                          alize
         The Divine
         Comedy (x)              q               MIPS                     z1                       pθ               This 14th century work
                                                                                                                    is divided into 3
       Jeopardy Question                                                                                            sections: "Inferno",
          Generation:                                                                                               "Purgatorio" &
         Answer Query                                                                                               "Paradiso"         (y)
                                                                                                                       Question Generation



Figure 1: Overview of our approach. We combine a pre-trained retriever (Query Encoder + Document
Index) with a pre-trained seq2seq model (Generator) and fine-tune end-to-end. For query x, we use
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) to find the top-K documents zi . For final prediction y, we
treat z as a latent variable and marginalize over seq2seq predictions given different documents.


but have only explored open-domain extractive question answering. Here, we bring hybrid parametric
and non-parametric memory to the “workhorse of NLP,” i.e. sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models.
We endow pre-trained, parametric-memory generation models with a non-parametric memory through
a general-purpose fine-tuning approach which we refer to as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
We build RAG models where the parametric memory is a pre-trained seq2seq transformer, and the
non-parametric memory is a dense vector index of Wikipedia, accessed with a pre-trained neural
retriever. We combine these components in a probabilistic model trained end-to-end (Fig. 1). The
retriever (Dense Passage Retriever [26], henceforth DPR) provides latent documents conditioned on
the input, and the seq2seq model (BART [32]) then conditions on these latent documents together with
the input to generate the output. We marginalize the latent documents with a top-K approximation,
either on a per-output basis (assuming the same document is responsible for all tokens) or a per-token
basis (where different documents are responsible for different tokens). Like T5 [51] or BART, RAG
can be fine-tuned on any seq2seq task, whereby both the generator and retriever are jointly learned.
There has been extensive previous work proposing architectures to enrich systems with non-parametric
memory which are trained from scratch for specific tasks, e.g. memory networks [64, 55], stack-
augmented networks [25] and memory layers [30]. In contrast, we explore a setting where both
parametric and non-parametric memory components are pre-trained and pre-loaded with extensive
knowledge. Crucially, by using pre-trained access mechanisms, the ability to access knowledge is
present without additional training.
Our results highlight the benefits of combining parametric and non-parametric memory with genera-
tion for knowledge-intensive tasks—tasks that humans could not reasonably be expected to perform
without access to an external knowledge source. Our RAG models achieve state-of-the-art results
on open Natural Questions [29], WebQuestions [3] and CuratedTrec [2] and strongly outperform
recent approaches that use specialised pre-training objectives on TriviaQA [24]. Despite these being
extractive tasks, we find that unconstrained generation outperforms previous extractive approaches.
For knowledge-intensive generation, we experiment with MS-MARCO [1] and Jeopardy question
generation, and we find that our models generate responses that are more factual, specific, and
diverse than a BART baseline. For FEVER [56] fact verification, we achieve results within 4.3% of
state-of-the-art pipeline models which use strong retrieval supervision. Finally, we demonstrate that
the non-parametric memory can be replaced to update the models’ knowledge as the world changes.1

2      Methods
We explore RAG models, which use the input sequence x to retrieve text documents z and use them
as additional context when generating the target sequence y. As shown in Figure 1, our models
leverage two components: (i) a retriever pη (z|x) with parameters η that returns (top-K truncated)
distributions over text passages given a query x and (ii) a generator pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 ) parametrized
    1
      Code to run experiments with RAG has been open-sourced as part of the HuggingFace Transform-
ers Library [66] and can be found at https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/
examples/rag/. An interactive demo of RAG models can be found at https://huggingface.co/rag/


                                                                   2
by θ that generates a current token based on a context of the previous i − 1 tokens y1:i−1 , the original
input x and a retrieved passage z.
To train the retriever and generator end-to-end, we treat the retrieved document as a latent variable.
We propose two models that marginalize over the latent documents in different ways to produce a
distribution over generated text. In one approach, RAG-Sequence, the model uses the same document
to predict each target token. The second approach, RAG-Token, can predict each target token based
on a different document. In the following, we formally introduce both models and then describe the
pη and pθ components, as well as the training and decoding procedure.

2.1   Models

RAG-Sequence Model The RAG-Sequence model uses the same retrieved document to generate
the complete sequence. Technically, it treats the retrieved document as a single latent variable that
is marginalized to get the seq2seq probability p(y|x) via a top-K approximation. Concretely, the
top K documents are retrieved using the retriever, and the generator produces the output sequence
probability for each document, which are then marginalized,
                                 X                                 X               N
                                                                                   Y
         pRAG-Sequence (y|x) ≈       pη (z|x)pθ (y|x, z) =              pη (z|x)       pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 )
                          z∈top-k(p(·|x))                   z∈top-k(p(·|x))        i


RAG-Token Model In the RAG-Token model we can draw a different latent document for each
target token and marginalize accordingly. This allows the generator to choose content from several
documents when producing an answer. Concretely, the top K documents are retrieved using the
retriever, and then the generator produces a distribution for the next output token for each document,
before marginalizing, and repeating the process with the following output token, Formally, we define:
                                        N
                                        Y            X
                   pRAG-Token (y|x) ≈                             pη (z|x)pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 )
                                            i   z∈top-k(p(·|x))

Finally, we note that RAG can be used for sequence classification tasks by considering the target class
as a target sequence of length one, in which case RAG-Sequence and RAG-Token are equivalent.

2.2   Retriever: DPR

The retrieval component pη (z|x) is based on DPR [26]. DPR follows a bi-encoder architecture:
            pη (z|x) ∝ exp d(z)> q(x)
                                        
                                              d(z) = BERTd (z), q(x) = BERTq (x)
where d(z) is a dense representation of a document produced by a BERTBASE document encoder [8],
and q(x) a query representation produced by a query encoder, also based on BERTBASE . Calculating
top-k(pη (·|x)), the list of k documents z with highest prior probability pη (z|x), is a Maximum Inner
Product Search (MIPS) problem, which can be approximately solved in sub-linear time [23]. We use
a pre-trained bi-encoder from DPR to initialize our retriever and to build the document index. This
retriever was trained to retrieve documents which contain answers to TriviaQA [24] questions and
Natural Questions [29]. We refer to the document index as the non-parametric memory.

2.3   Generator: BART

The generator component pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 ) could be modelled using any encoder-decoder. We use
BART-large [32], a pre-trained seq2seq transformer [58] with 400M parameters. To combine the input
x with the retrieved content z when generating from BART, we simply concatenate them. BART was
pre-trained using a denoising objective and a variety of different noising functions. It has obtained
state-of-the-art results on a diverse set of generation tasks and outperforms comparably-sized T5
models [32]. We refer to the BART generator parameters θ as the parametric memory henceforth.

2.4   Training

We jointly train the retriever and generator components without any direct supervision on what
document should be retrieved. Given a fine-tuning training corpus of input/output pairs (xj , yj ), we


                                                        3
