                                  Switch Transformers




                                                          y1                                         y2


                                                                               Add + Normalize

                y

                                               FFN 1        FFN 2      FFN 3   FFN 4        FFN 1         FFN 2   FFN 3   FFN 4
        Add + Normalize

                                                                                                                              p = 0.8
                                         p = 0.65
       Switching FFN Layer


                                                                    Router                                    Router
        Add + Normalize


          Self-Attention
                                                                                 Add + Normalize


                x
                                                                                  Self-Attention


                                                         Positional                                 Positional
                                                        embedding                                  embedding

                                                         x1                                          x2
                                                                    More                                  Parameters



Figure 2: Illustration of a Switch Transformer encoder block. We replace the dense feed
          forward network (FFN) layer present in the Transformer with a sparse Switch
          FFN layer (light blue). The layer operates independently on the tokens in the
          sequence. We diagram two tokens (x1 = “More” and x2 = “Parameters” below)
          being routed (solid lines) across four FFN experts, where the router independently
          routes each token. The switch FFN layer returns the output of the selected FFN
          multiplied by the router gate value (dotted-line).



2.1 Simplifying Sparse Routing
Mixture of Expert Routing. Shazeer et al. (2017) proposed a natural language Mixture-
of-Experts (MoE) layer which takes as an input a token representation x and then routes
this to the best determined top-k experts, selected from a set {Ei (x)}N  i=1 of N experts.
The router variable Wr produces logits h(x) = Wr · x which are normalized via a softmax
distribution over the available N experts at that layer. The gate-value for expert i is given
by,
                                               eh(x)i
                                    pi (x) = PN          .                                (1)
                                                   h(x)j
                                               j e

The top-k gate values are selected for routing the token x. If T is the set of selected top-k
indices then the output computation of the layer is the linearly weighted combination of
each expert’s computation on the token by the gate value,
                                         X
                                    y=      pi (x)Ei (x).                                 (2)
                                         i∈T

    Switch Routing: Rethinking Mixture-of-Experts. Shazeer et al. (2017) conjec-
tured that routing to k > 1 experts was necessary in order to have non-trivial gradients to
the routing functions. The authors intuited that learning to route would not work without
the ability to compare at least two experts. Ramachandran and Le (2018) went further to

                                                    5
                                              Fedus, Zoph and Shazeer




study the top-k decision and found that higher k-values in lower layers in the model were
important for models with many routing layers. Contrary to these ideas, we instead use
a simplified strategy where we route to only a single expert. We show this simplification
preserves model quality, reduces routing computation and performs better. This k = 1
routing strategy is later referred to as a Switch layer. Note that for both MoE and Switch
Routing, the gate value pi (x) in Equation 2 permits differentiability of the router.
    The benefits for the Switch layer are three-fold: (1) The router computation is reduced
as we are only routing a token to a single expert. (2) The batch size (expert capacity) of
each expert can be at least halved since each token is only being routed to a single expert.3
(3) The routing implementation is simplified and communication costs are reduced. Figure
3 shows an example of routing with different expert capacity factors.
          Terminology                         (Capacity Factor: 1.0)              (Capacity Factor: 1.5)

   Experts: Split across devices,        Expert 1    Expert 2     Expert 3    Expert 1     Expert 2    Expert 3
   each having their own unique           Device 0     Device 1    Device 2     Device 0    Device 1    Device 2
   parameters. Perform standard feed-
   forward computation.


   Expert Capacity: Batch size of
   each expert. Calculated as
   (tokens_per_batch / num_experts) *                                                                              Across Device
   capacity_factor                                                                                                 Communication


   Capacity Factor: Used when
   calculating expert capacity. Expert
   capacity allows more buffer to help
   mitigate token overﬂow during
                                                       Device 0                             Device 0
   routing.

                                                      Tokens                               Tokens



Figure 3: Illustration of token routing dynamics. Each expert processes a fixed batch-size
          of tokens modulated by the capacity factor. Each token is routed to the expert
          with the highest router probability, but each expert has a fixed batch size of
          (total tokens / num experts) × capacity factor. If the tokens are unevenly dis-
          patched then certain experts will overflow (denoted by dotted red lines), resulting
          in these tokens not being processed by this layer. A larger capacity factor allevi-
          ates this overflow issue, but also increases computation and communication costs
          (depicted by padded white/empty slots).



2.2 Efficient Sparse Routing
We use Mesh-Tensorflow (MTF) (Shazeer et al., 2018) which is a library, with similar seman-
tics and API to Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016) that facilitates efficient distributed data and
model parallel architectures. It does so by abstracting the physical set of cores to a logical
mesh of processors. Tensors and computations may then be sharded per named dimensions,
facilitating easy partitioning of models across dimensions. We design our model with TPUs
in mind, which require statically declared sizes. Below we describe our distributed Switch
Transformer implementation.
3. See Section 2.2 for a technical description.


                                                                  6
                                     Switch Transformers




    Distributed Switch Implementation. All of our tensor shapes are statically deter-
mined at compilation time, but our computation is dynamic due to the routing decisions at
training and inference. Because of this, one important technical consideration is how to set
the expert capacity. The expert capacity—the number of tokens each expert computes—is
set by evenly dividing the number of tokens in the batch across the number of experts, and
then further expanding by a capacity factor,
                                                      
                                      tokens per batch
                 expert capacity =                       × capacity factor.              (3)
                                     number of experts

A capacity factor greater than 1.0 creates additional buffer to accommodate for when to-
kens are not perfectly balanced across experts. If too many tokens are routed to an expert
(referred to later as dropped tokens), computation is skipped and the token representa-
tion is passed directly to the next layer through the residual connection. Increasing the
expert capacity is not without drawbacks, however, since high values will result in wasted
computation and memory. This trade-off is explained in Figure 3. Empirically we find en-
suring lower rates of dropped tokens are important for the scaling of sparse expert-models.
Throughout our experiments we didn’t notice any dependency on the number of experts
for the number of tokens dropped (typically < 1%). Using the auxiliary load balancing loss
(next section) with a high enough coefficient ensured good load balancing. We study the
impact that these design decisions have on model quality and speed in Table 1.
    A Differentiable Load Balancing Loss. To encourage a balanced load across experts
we add an auxiliary loss (Shazeer et al., 2017, 2018; Lepikhin et al., 2020). As in Shazeer
et al. (2018); Lepikhin et al. (2020), Switch Transformers simplifies the original design in
Shazeer et al. (2017) which had separate load-balancing and importance-weighting losses.
For each Switch layer, this auxiliary loss is added to the total model loss during training.
Given N experts indexed by i = 1 to N and a batch B with T tokens, the auxiliary loss is
computed as the scaled dot-product between vectors f and P ,
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                     loss = α · N ·         fi · Pi                                (4)
                                                      i=1

where fi is the fraction of tokens dispatched to expert i,
                                        1 X
                                 fi =       1{argmax p(x) = i}                                     (5)
                                        T
                                         x∈B

and Pi is the fraction of the router probability allocated for expert i, 2
                                                1 X
                                         Pi =       pi (x).                                        (6)
                                                T
                                                  x∈B

Since we seek uniform routing of the batch of tokens across the N experts, we desire both
vectors to have values of 1/N . The auxiliary loss of Equation 4 encourages uniform routing
since it is minimized under a uniform distribution. The objective can also be differentiated as
2. A potential source of confusion: pi (x) is the probability of routing token x to expert i. Pi is the
   probability fraction to expert i across all tokens in the batch B.


                                                  7
