
--- original tool-calling.txt lines 37-60 ---
tool
refers in the abstract to a piece of functionality that we tell the model it has access to. As a model generates a response to a prompt, it may decide that it needs data or functionality provided by a tool to follow the prompt’s instructions.
You could give the model access to tools that:
Get today’s weather for a location
Access account details for a given user ID
Issue refunds for a lost order
Or anything else you’d like the model to be able to know or do as it responds to a prompt.
When we make an API request to the model with a prompt, we can include a list of tools the model could consider using. For example, if we wanted the model to be able to answer questions about the current weather somewhere in the world, we might give it access to a
get_weather
tool that takes
location
as an argument.
Tool calls - requests from the model to use tools
A
function call
or
tool call
refers to a special kind of response we can get from the model if it examines a prompt, and then determines that in order to follow the instructions in the prompt, it needs to call one of the tools we made available to it.
If the model receives a prompt like “what is the weather in Paris?” in an API request, it could respond to that prompt with a tool call for the
get_weather
tool, with
Paris
as the
location

--- original tool-calling.txt lines 94-113 ---
Functions versus tools
A function is a specific kind of tool, defined by a JSON schema. A function definition allows the model to pass data to your application, where your code can access data or take actions suggested by the model.
In addition to function tools, there are custom tools (described in this guide) that work with free text inputs and outputs.
The OpenAI platform also provides
built-in tools
. These tools enable the model to
search the web
,
run code
, access the functionality of an
MCP server
, and more.
The tool calling flow
Tool calling is a multi-step conversation between your application and a model via the OpenAI API. The tool calling flow has five high level steps:
Make a request to the model with tools it could call
Receive a tool call from the model
Execute code on the application side with input from the tool call
Make a second request to the model with the tool output
Receive a final response from the model (or more tool calls)
With Responses, your application can continue this flow for as many tool calls as the task requires. If you want a framework that packages recurring orchestration around that loop, see

--- original tool-calling.txt lines 1630-1638 ---
get_weather
)
description
Details on when and how to use the function
parameters
JSON schema
defining the function’s input arguments
strict
Whether to enforce strict mode for the function call
