
ORIGINAL sparsely-gated-v1.txt L1-L22
                                         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017




                                         O UTRAGEOUSLY L ARGE N EURAL N ETWORKS :
                                         T HE S PARSELY-G ATED M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS L AYER

                                             Noam Shazeer1 , Azalia Mirhoseini∗†1 , Krzysztof Maziarz∗2 , Andy Davis1 , Quoc Le1 , Geoffrey
                                                                               Hinton1 and Jeff Dean1
                                                         1
                                                             Google Brain, {noam,azalia,andydavis,qvl,geoffhinton,jeff}@google.com
                                                              2
                                                                Jagiellonian University, Cracow, krzysztof.maziarz@student.uj.edu.pl
arXiv:1701.06538v1 [cs.LG] 23 Jan 2017




                                                                                         A BSTRACT

                                                      The capacity of a neural network to absorb information is limited by its number of

ORIGINAL sparsely-gated-v1.txt L154-L224
realize sparse gating and demonstrate its use as a practical way to massively increase model capacity.

2     T HE S TRUCTURE OF THE M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS LAYER
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer consists of a set of n “expert networks" E1 , · · · , En , and a
“gating network" G whose output is a sparse n-dimensional vector. Figure 1 shows an overview
of the MoE module. The experts are themselves neural networks, each with their own parameters.
Although in principle we only require that the experts accept the same sized inputs and produce the
same-sized outputs, in our initial investigations in this paper, we restrict ourselves to the case where
the models are feed-forward networks with identical architectures, but with separate parameters.
Let us denote by G(x) and Ei (x) the output of the gating network and the output of the i-th expert
network for a given input x. The output y of the MoE module can be written as follows:

                                              n
                                              X
                                         y=         G(x)i Ei (x)                                    (1)
                                              i=1

We save computation based on the sparsity of the output of G(x). Wherever G(x)i = 0, we need not
compute Ei (x). In our experiments, we have up to thousands of experts, but only need to evaluate
a handful of them for every example. If the number of experts is very large, we can reduce the
branching factor by using a two-level hierarchical MoE. In a hierarchical MoE, a primary gating
network chooses a sparse weighted combination of “experts", each of which is itself a secondary
mixture-of-experts with its own gating network. In the following we focus on ordinary MoEs. We
provide more details on hierarchical MoEs in Appendix B.
Our implementation is related to other models of conditional computation. A MoE whose experts are
simple weight matrices is similar to the parameterized weight matrix proposed in (Cho & Bengio,
2014). A MoE whose experts have one hidden layer is similar to the block-wise dropout described
in (Bengio et al., 2015), where the dropped-out layer is sandwiched between fully-activated layers.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017




2.1   G ATING N ETWORK

Softmax Gating: A simple choice of non-sparse gating function (Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) is to
multiply the input by a trainable weight matrix Wg and then apply the Sof tmax function.

                                   Gσ (x) = Sof tmax(x · Wg )                                     (2)

Noisy Top-K Gating: We add two components to the Softmax gating network: sparsity and noise.
Before taking the softmax function, we add tunable Gaussian noise, then keep only the top k values,
setting the rest to −∞ (which causes the corresponding gate values to equal 0). The sparsity serves
to save computation, as described above. While this form of sparsity creates some theoretically
scary discontinuities in the output of gating function, we have not yet observed this to be a problem
in practice. The noise term helps with load balancing, as will be discussed in Appendix A. The
amount of noise per component is controlled by a second trainable weight matrix Wnoise .

                            G(x) = Sof tmax(KeepT opK(H(x), k))                                   (3)


              H(x)i = (x · Wg )i + StandardN ormal() · Sof tplus((x · Wnoise )i )                 (4)

                                        
                                            vi if vi is in the top k elements of v.
                 KeepT opK(v, k)i =                                                               (5)
                                            −∞ otherwise.

Training the Gating Network We train the gating network by simple back-propagation, along
with the rest of the model. If we choose k > 1, the gate values for the top k experts have nonzero
derivatives with respect to the weights of the gating network. This type of occasionally-sensitive
behavior is described in (Bengio et al., 2013) with respect to noisy rectifiers. Gradients also back-
propagate through the gating network to its inputs. Our method differs here from (Bengio et al.,
2015) who use boolean gates and a REINFORCE-style approach to train the gating network.

3     A DDRESSING P ERFORMANCE C HALLENGES
3.1   T HE S HRINKING BATCH P ROBLEM

ORIGINAL sparsely-gated-v1.txt L293-L332
4     BALANCING E XPERT U TILIZATION
We have observed that the gating network tends to converge to a state where it always produces
large weights for the same few experts. This imbalance is self-reinforcing, as the favored experts
are trained more rapidly and thus are selected even more by the gating network. Eigen et al. (2013)
describe the same phenomenon, and use a hard constraint at the beginning of training to avoid this
local minimum. Bengio et al. (2015) include a soft constraint on the batch-wise average of each
gate.1
We take a soft constraint approach. We define the importance of an expert relative to a batch of
training examples to be the batchwise sum of the gate values for that expert. We define an additional
loss Limportance , which is added to the overall loss function for the model. This loss is equal to
the square of the coefficient of variation of the set of importance values, multiplied by a hand-tuned
scaling factor wimportance . This additional loss encourages all experts to have equal importance.
                                                               X
                                       Importance(X) =               G(x)                                     (6)
                                                               x∈X


                       Limportance (X) = wimportance · CV (Importance(X))2                                    (7)
   1
     Bengio et al. (2015) also include two additional losses. One controls per-example sparsity, which we do
not need since it is enforced by the fixed value of k. A third loss encourages diversity of gate values. In our
experiments, we find that the gate values naturally diversify as the experts specialize (in a virtuous cycle), and
we do not need to enforce diversity of gate values.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017




While this loss function can ensure equal importance, experts may still receive very different num-
bers of examples. For example, one expert may receive a few examples with large weights, and
another may receive many examples with small weights. This can cause memory and performance
problems on distributed hardware. To solve this problem, we introduce a second loss function,
Lload , which ensures balanced loads. Appendix A contains the definition of this function, along
with experimental results.

5     E XPERIMENTS
