Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

O UTRAGEOUSLY L ARGE N EURAL N ETWORKS :
T HE S PARSELY-G ATED M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS L AYER
Noam Shazeer1 , Azalia Mirhoseini∗†1 , Krzysztof Maziarz∗2 , Andy Davis1 , Quoc Le1 , Geoffrey
Hinton1 and Jeff Dean1

arXiv:1701.06538v1 [cs.LG] 23 Jan 2017

1

Google Brain, {noam,azalia,andydavis,qvl,geoffhinton,jeff}@google.com
2
Jagiellonian University, Cracow, krzysztof.maziarz@student.uj.edu.pl

A BSTRACT
The capacity of a neural network to absorb information is limited by its number of
parameters. Conditional computation, where parts of the network are active on a
per-example basis, has been proposed in theory as a way of dramatically increasing model capacity without a proportional increase in computation. In practice,
however, there are significant algorithmic and performance challenges. In this
work, we address these challenges and finally realize the promise of conditional
computation, achieving greater than 1000x improvements in model capacity with
only minor losses in computational efficiency on modern GPU clusters. We introduce a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts layer (MoE), consisting of up to
thousands of feed-forward sub-networks. A trainable gating network determines
a sparse combination of these experts to use for each example. We apply the MoE
to the tasks of language modeling and machine translation, where model capacity
is critical for absorbing the vast quantities of knowledge available in the training
corpora. We present model architectures in which a MoE with up to 137 billion
parameters is applied convolutionally between stacked LSTM layers. On large
language modeling and machine translation benchmarks, these models achieve
significantly better results than state-of-the-art at lower computational cost.

1

I NTRODUCTION AND R ELATED W ORK

1.1

C ONDITIONAL C OMPUTATION

Exploiting scale in both training data and model size has been central to the success of deep learning. When datasets are sufficiently large, increasing the capacity (number of parameters) of neural
networks can give much better prediction accuracy. This has been shown in domains such as text
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Jozefowicz et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016), images
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Le et al., 2012), and audio (Hinton et al., 2012; Amodei et al., 2015). For
typical deep learning models, where the entire model is activated for every example, this leads to
a roughly quadratic blow-up in training costs, as both the model size and the number of training
examples increase. Unfortunately, the advances in computing power and distributed computation
fall short of meeting such demand.
Various forms of conditional computation have been proposed as a way to increase model capacity
without a proportional increase in computational costs (Davis & Arel, 2013; Bengio et al., 2013;
Eigen et al., 2013; Ludovic Denoyer, 2014; Cho & Bengio, 2014; Bengio et al., 2015; Almahairi
et al., 2015). In these schemes, large parts of a network are active or inactive on a per-example
basis. The gating decisions may be binary or sparse and continuous, stochastic or deterministic.
Various forms of reinforcement learning and back-propagation are proposed for trarining the gating
decisions.
∗
†

Equally major contributors
Work done as a member of the Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency)

1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 1: A Mixture of Experts (MoE) layer embedded within a recurrent language model. In this
case, the sparse gating function selects two experts to perform computations. Their outputs are
modulated by the outputs of the gating network.
While these ideas are promising in theory, no work to date has yet demonstrated massive improvements in model capacity, training time, or model quality. We blame this on a combination of the
following challenges:
• Modern computing devices, especially GPUs, are much faster at arithmetic than at branching. Most of the works above recognize this and propose turning on/off large chunks of the
network with each gating decision.
• Large batch sizes are critical for performance, as they amortize the costs of parameter transfers and updates. Conditional computation reduces the batch sizes for the conditionally
active chunks of the network.
• Network bandwidth can be a bottleneck. A cluster of GPUs may have computational power
thousands of times greater than the aggregate inter-device network bandwidth. To be computationally efficient, the relative computational versus network demands of an algorithm
must exceed this ratio. Embedding layers, which can be seen as a form of conditional computation, are handicapped by this very problem. Since the embeddings generally need to
be sent across the network, the number of (example, parameter) interactions is limited by
network bandwidth instead of computational capacity.
• Depending on the scheme, loss terms may be necessary to achieve the desired level of
sparsity per-chunk and/or per example. Bengio et al. (2015) use three such terms. These
issues can affect both model quality and load-balancing.
• Model capacity is most critical for very large data sets. The existing literature on conditional computation deals with relatively small image recognition data sets consisting of up
to 600,000 images. It is hard to imagine that the labels of these images provide a sufficient
signal to adequately train a model with millions, let alone billions of parameters.
In this work, we for the first time address all of the above challenges and finally realize the promise
of conditional computation. We obtain greater than 1000x improvements in model capacity with
only minor losses in computational efficiency and significantly advance the state-of-the-art results
on public language modeling and translation data sets.
1.2

O UR A PPROACH : T HE S PARSELY-G ATED M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS L AYER

Our approach to conditional computation is to introduce a new type of general purpose neural network component: a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer (MoE). The MoE consists of a number of experts, each a simple feed-forward neural network, and a trainable gating network which
selects a sparse combination of the experts to process each input (see Figure 1). All parts of the
network are trained jointly by back-propagation.
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

While the introduced technique is generic, in this paper we focus on language modeling and machine
translation tasks, which are known to benefit from very large models. In particular, we apply a MoE
convolutionally between stacked LSTM layers (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), as in Figure 1.
The MoE is called once for each position in the text, selecting a potentially different combination
of experts at each position. The different experts tend to become highly specialized based on syntax
and semantics (see Appendix E Table 9). On both language modeling and machine translation
benchmarks, we improve on best published results at a fraction of the computational cost.
1.3

R ELATED WORK ON M IXTURES OF E XPERTS

Since its introduction more than two decades ago (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994),
the mixture-of-experts approach has been the subject of much research. Different types of expert
architectures hae been proposed such as SVMs (Collobert et al., 2002), Gaussian Processes (Tresp,
2001; Theis & Bethge, 2015; Deisenroth & Ng, 2015), Dirichlet Processes (Shahbaba & Neal, 2009),
and deep networks. Other work has focused on different expert configurations such as a hierarchical
structure (Yao et al., 2009), infinite numbers of experts (Rasmussen & Ghahramani, 2002), and
adding experts sequentially (Aljundi et al., 2016). Garmash & Monz (2016) suggest an ensemble
model in the format of mixture of experts for machine translation. The gating network is trained on
a pre-trained ensemble NMT model.
The works above concern top-level mixtures of experts. The mixture of experts is the whole model.
Eigen et al. (2013) introduce the idea of using multiple MoEs with their own gating networks as
parts of a deep model. It is intuitive that the latter approach is more powerful, since complex problems may contain many sub-problems each requiring different experts. They also allude in their
conclusion to the potential to introduce sparsity, turning MoEs into a vehicle for computational
computation.
Our work builds on this use of MoEs as a general purpose neural network component. While Eigen
et al. (2013) uses two stacked MoEs allowing for two sets of gating decisions, our convolutional
application of the MoE allows for different gating decisions at each position in the text. We also
realize sparse gating and demonstrate its use as a practical way to massively increase model capacity.

2

T HE S TRUCTURE OF THE M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS LAYER

The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer consists of a set of n “expert networks" E1 , · · · , En , and a
“gating network" G whose output is a sparse n-dimensional vector. Figure 1 shows an overview
of the MoE module. The experts are themselves neural networks, each with their own parameters.
Although in principle we only require that the experts accept the same sized inputs and produce the
same-sized outputs, in our initial investigations in this paper, we restrict ourselves to the case where
the models are feed-forward networks with identical architectures, but with separate parameters.
Let us denote by G(x) and Ei (x) the output of the gating network and the output of the i-th expert
network for a given input x. The output y of the MoE module can be written as follows:

y=

n
X

G(x)i Ei (x)

(1)

i=1

We save computation based on the sparsity of the output of G(x). Wherever G(x)i = 0, we need not
compute Ei (x). In our experiments, we have up to thousands of experts, but only need to evaluate
a handful of them for every example. If the number of experts is very large, we can reduce the
branching factor by using a two-level hierarchical MoE. In a hierarchical MoE, a primary gating
network chooses a sparse weighted combination of “experts", each of which is itself a secondary
mixture-of-experts with its own gating network. In the following we focus on ordinary MoEs. We
provide more details on hierarchical MoEs in Appendix B.
Our implementation is related to other models of conditional computation. A MoE whose experts are
simple weight matrices is similar to the parameterized weight matrix proposed in (Cho & Bengio,
2014). A MoE whose experts have one hidden layer is similar to the block-wise dropout described
in (Bengio et al., 2015), where the dropped-out layer is sandwiched between fully-activated layers.
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

2.1

G ATING N ETWORK

Softmax Gating: A simple choice of non-sparse gating function (Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) is to
multiply the input by a trainable weight matrix Wg and then apply the Sof tmax function.
Gσ (x) = Sof tmax(x · Wg )

(2)

Noisy Top-K Gating: We add two components to the Softmax gating network: sparsity and noise.
Before taking the softmax function, we add tunable Gaussian noise, then keep only the top k values,
setting the rest to −∞ (which causes the corresponding gate values to equal 0). The sparsity serves
to save computation, as described above. While this form of sparsity creates some theoretically
scary discontinuities in the output of gating function, we have not yet observed this to be a problem
in practice. The noise term helps with load balancing, as will be discussed in Appendix A. The
amount of noise per component is controlled by a second trainable weight matrix Wnoise .
G(x) = Sof tmax(KeepT opK(H(x), k))

(3)

H(x)i = (x · Wg )i + StandardN ormal() · Sof tplus((x · Wnoise )i )

(4)


KeepT opK(v, k)i =

vi
if vi is in the top k elements of v.
−∞ otherwise.

(5)

Training the Gating Network We train the gating network by simple back-propagation, along
with the rest of the model. If we choose k > 1, the gate values for the top k experts have nonzero
derivatives with respect to the weights of the gating network. This type of occasionally-sensitive
behavior is described in (Bengio et al., 2013) with respect to noisy rectifiers. Gradients also backpropagate through the gating network to its inputs. Our method differs here from (Bengio et al.,
2015) who use boolean gates and a REINFORCE-style approach to train the gating network.

3

A DDRESSING P ERFORMANCE C HALLENGES

3.1

T HE S HRINKING BATCH P ROBLEM

On modern CPUs and GPUs, large batch sizes are necessary for computational efficiency, so as
to amortize the overhead of parameter loads and updates. If the gating network chooses k out of
n experts for each example, then for a batch of b examples, each expert receives a much smaller
batch of approximately kb
n  b examples. This causes a naive MoE implementation to become
very inefficient as the number of experts increases. The solution to this shrinking batch problem is
to make the original batch size as large as possible. However, batch size tends to be limited by the
memory necessary to store activations between the forwards and backwards passes. We propose the
following techniques for increasing the batch size:
Mixing Data Parallelism and Model Parallelism: In a conventional distributed training setting,
multiple copies of the model on different devices asynchronously process distinct batches of data,
and parameters are synchronized through a set of parameter servers. In our technique, these different
batches run synchronously so that they can be combined for the MoE layer. We distribute the
standard layers of the model and the gating network according to conventional data-parallel schemes,
but keep only one shared copy of each expert. Each expert in the MoE layer receives a combined
batch consisting of the relevant examples from all of the data-parallel input batches. The same set
of devices function as data-parallel replicas (for the standard layers and the gating networks) and
as model-parallel shards (each hosting a subset of the experts). If the model is distributed over d
devices, and each device processes a batch of size b, each expert receives a batch of approximately
kbd
n examples. Thus, we achieve a factor of d improvement in expert batch size.
In the case of a hierarchical MoE (Section B), the primary gating network employs data parallelism,
and the secondary MoEs employ model parallelism. Each secondary MoE resides on one device.
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

This technique allows us to increase the number of experts (and hence the number of parameters) by
proportionally increasing the number of devices in the training cluster. The total batch size increases,
keeping the batch size per expert constant. The memory and bandwidth requirements per device also
remain constant, as do the step times, as does the amount of time necessary to process a number of
training examples equal to the number of parameters in the model. It is our goal to train a trillionparameter model on a trillion-word corpus. We have not scaled our systems this far as of the writing
of this paper, but it should be possible by adding more hardware.
Taking Advantage of Convolutionality: In our language models, we apply the same MoE to each
time step of the previous layer. If we wait for the previous layer to finish, we can apply the MoE
to all the time steps together as one big batch. Doing so increases the size of the input batch to the
MoE layer by a factor of the number of unrolled time steps.
Increasing Batch Size for a Recurrent MoE: We suspect that even more powerful models may
involve applying a MoE recurrently. For example, the weight matrices of a LSTM or other RNN
could be replaced by a MoE. Sadly, such models break the convolutional trick from the last paragraph, since the input to the MoE at one timestep depends on the output of the MoE at the previous
timestep. Gruslys et al. (2016) describe a technique for drastically reducing the number of stored
activations in an unrolled RNN, at the cost of recomputing forward activations. This would allow
for a large increase in batch size.
3.2

N ETWORK BANDWIDTH

Another major performance concern in distributed computing is network bandwidth. Since the experts are stationary (see above) and the number of gating parameters is small, most of the communication involves sending the inputs and outputs of the experts across the network. To maintain computational efficiency, the ratio of an expert’s computation to the size of its input and output must exceed the ratio of computational to network capacity of the computing device. For GPUs, this may be
thousands to one. In our experiments, we use experts with one hidden layer containing thousands of
RELU-activated units. Since the weight matrices in the expert have sizes input_size×hidden_size
and hidden_size × output_size, the ratio of computation to input and output is equal to the size of
the hidden layer. Conveniently, we can increase computational efficiency simply by using a larger
hidden layer, or more hidden layers.

4

BALANCING E XPERT U TILIZATION

We have observed that the gating network tends to converge to a state where it always produces
large weights for the same few experts. This imbalance is self-reinforcing, as the favored experts
are trained more rapidly and thus are selected even more by the gating network. Eigen et al. (2013)
describe the same phenomenon, and use a hard constraint at the beginning of training to avoid this
local minimum. Bengio et al. (2015) include a soft constraint on the batch-wise average of each
gate.1
We take a soft constraint approach. We define the importance of an expert relative to a batch of
training examples to be the batchwise sum of the gate values for that expert. We define an additional
loss Limportance , which is added to the overall loss function for the model. This loss is equal to
the square of the coefficient of variation of the set of importance values, multiplied by a hand-tuned
scaling factor wimportance . This additional loss encourages all experts to have equal importance.
Importance(X) =

X

G(x)

(6)

x∈X

Limportance (X) = wimportance · CV (Importance(X))2

(7)

1
Bengio et al. (2015) also include two additional losses. One controls per-example sparsity, which we do
not need since it is enforced by the fixed value of k. A third loss encourages diversity of gate values. In our
experiments, we find that the gate values naturally diversify as the experts specialize (in a virtuous cycle), and
we do not need to enforce diversity of gate values.

5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

While this loss function can ensure equal importance, experts may still receive very different numbers of examples. For example, one expert may receive a few examples with large weights, and
another may receive many examples with small weights. This can cause memory and performance
problems on distributed hardware. To solve this problem, we introduce a second loss function,
Lload , which ensures balanced loads. Appendix A contains the definition of this function, along
with experimental results.

5

E XPERIMENTS

5.1

1 B ILLION W ORD L ANGUAGE M ODELING B ENCHMARK

Dataset: This dataset, introduced by (Chelba et al., 2013) consists of shuffled unique sentences
from news articles, totaling approximately 829 million words, with a vocabulary of 793,471 words.
Previous State-of-the-Art: The best previously published results (Jozefowicz et al., 2016) use
models consisting of one or more stacked Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) layers (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 2000). The number of parameters in the LSTM layers of these
models vary from 2 million to 151 million. Quality increases greatly with parameter count, as do
computational costs. Results for these models form the top line of Figure 2-right.
MoE Models: Our models consist of two stacked LSTM layers with a MoE layer between them
(see Figure 1). We vary the sizes of the layers and the number of experts. For full details on model
architecture, training regimen, additional baselines and results, see Appendix C.
Low Computation, Varied Capacity: To investigate the effects of adding capacity, we trained
a series of MoE models all with roughly equal computational costs: about 8 million multiply-andadds per training example per timestep in the forwards pass, excluding the softmax layer. We call
this metric (ops/timestep). We trained models with flat MoEs containing 4, 32, and 256 experts, and
models with hierarchical MoEs containing 256, 1024, and 4096 experts. Each expert had about 1
million parameters. For all the MoE layers, 4 experts were active per input.
The results of these models are shown in Figure 2-left. The model with 4 always-active experts
performed (unsurprisingly) similarly to the computationally-matched baseline models, while the
largest of the models (4096 experts) achieved an impressive 24% lower perplexity on the test set.

Figure 2: Model comparison on 1-Billion-Word Language-Modeling Benchmark. On the left, we
plot test perplexity as a function of model capacity for models with similar computational budgets
of approximately 8-million-ops-per-timestep. On the right, we plot test perplexity as a function of
computational budget. The top line represents the LSTM models from (Jozefowicz et al., 2016).
The bottom line represents 4-billion parameter MoE models with different computational budgets.
Varied Computation, High Capacity: In addition to the largest model from the previous section,
we trained two more MoE models with similarly high capacity (4 billion parameters), but higher
computation budgets. These models had larger LSTMs, and fewer but larger and experts. Details
6

