Fedus, Zoph and Shazeer

study the top-k decision and found that higher k-values in lower layers in the model were
important for models with many routing layers. Contrary to these ideas, we instead use
a simplified strategy where we route to only a single expert. We show this simplification
preserves model quality, reduces routing computation and performs better. This k = 1
routing strategy is later referred to as a Switch layer. Note that for both MoE and Switch
Routing, the gate value pi (x) in Equation 2 permits differentiability of the router.
The benefits for the Switch layer are three-fold: (1) The router computation is reduced
as we are only routing a token to a single expert. (2) The batch size (expert capacity) of
each expert can be at least halved since each token is only being routed to a single expert.3
(3) The routing implementation is simplified and communication costs are reduced. Figure
3 shows an example of routing with different expert capacity factors.
Terminology
Experts: Split across devices,
each having their own unique
parameters. Perform standard feedforward computation.

(Capacity Factor: 1.0)
Expert 1

Expert 2

Expert 3

Device 0

Device 1

Device 2

(Capacity Factor: 1.5)
Expert 1
Device 0

Expert 2

Expert 3

Device 1

Device 2

Expert Capacity: Batch size of
each expert. Calculated as
(tokens_per_batch / num_experts) *
capacity_factor

Across Device
Communication

Capacity Factor: Used when
calculating expert capacity. Expert
capacity allows more buffer to help
mitigate token overﬂow during
routing.

Device 0

Device 0

Tokens

Tokens

Figure 3: Illustration of token routing dynamics. Each expert processes a fixed batch-size
of tokens modulated by the capacity factor. Each token is routed to the expert
with the highest router probability, but each expert has a fixed batch size of
(total tokens / num experts) × capacity factor. If the tokens are unevenly dispatched then certain experts will overflow (denoted by dotted red lines), resulting
in these tokens not being processed by this layer. A larger capacity factor alleviates this overflow issue, but also increases computation and communication costs
(depicted by padded white/empty slots).

2.2 Efficient Sparse Routing
We use Mesh-Tensorflow (MTF) (Shazeer et al., 2018) which is a library, with similar semantics and API to Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016) that facilitates efficient distributed data and
model parallel architectures. It does so by abstracting the physical set of cores to a logical
mesh of processors. Tensors and computations may then be sharded per named dimensions,
facilitating easy partitioning of models across dimensions. We design our model with TPUs
in mind, which require statically declared sizes. Below we describe our distributed Switch
Transformer implementation.
3. See Section 2.2 for a technical description.

6

Switch Transformers

Distributed Switch Implementation. All of our tensor shapes are statically determined at compilation time, but our computation is dynamic due to the routing decisions at
training and inference. Because of this, one important technical consideration is how to set
the expert capacity. The expert capacity—the number of tokens each expert computes—is
set by evenly dividing the number of tokens in the batch across the number of experts, and
then further expanding by a capacity factor,


tokens per batch
expert capacity =
× capacity factor.
(3)
number of experts
A capacity factor greater than 1.0 creates additional buffer to accommodate for when tokens are not perfectly balanced across experts. If too many tokens are routed to an expert
(referred to later as dropped tokens), computation is skipped and the token representation is passed directly to the next layer through the residual connection. Increasing the
expert capacity is not without drawbacks, however, since high values will result in wasted
computation and memory. This trade-off is explained in Figure 3. Empirically we find ensuring lower rates of dropped tokens are important for the scaling of sparse expert-models.
Throughout our experiments we didn’t notice any dependency on the number of experts
for the number of tokens dropped (typically < 1%). Using the auxiliary load balancing loss
(next section) with a high enough coefficient ensured good load balancing. We study the
impact that these design decisions have on model quality and speed in Table 1.
A Differentiable Load Balancing Loss. To encourage a balanced load across experts
we add an auxiliary loss (Shazeer et al., 2017, 2018; Lepikhin et al., 2020). As in Shazeer
et al. (2018); Lepikhin et al. (2020), Switch Transformers simplifies the original design in
Shazeer et al. (2017) which had separate load-balancing and importance-weighting losses.
For each Switch layer, this auxiliary loss is added to the total model loss during training.
Given N experts indexed by i = 1 to N and a batch B with T tokens, the auxiliary loss is
computed as the scaled dot-product between vectors f and P ,
loss = α · N ·

N
X

fi · Pi

(4)

i=1

where fi is the fraction of tokens dispatched to expert i,
fi =

1 X
1{argmax p(x) = i}
T

(5)

x∈B

and Pi is the fraction of the router probability allocated for expert i, 2
Pi =

1 X
pi (x).
T

(6)

x∈B

Since we seek uniform routing of the batch of tokens across the N experts, we desire both
vectors to have values of 1/N . The auxiliary loss of Equation 4 encourages uniform routing
since it is minimized under a uniform distribution. The objective can also be differentiated as
2. A potential source of confusion: pi (x) is the probability of routing token x to expert i. Pi is the
probability fraction to expert i across all tokens in the batch B.

7

