D     Labelling Instructions
Labelers were tasked to look at steps in a solution and label each one as posi-
tive, negative, or neutral. A step is considered neutral if it is appropriate in
context, reasonable, correct, and contains only computations that can be veri-
fied easily. A step is positive if it is neutral and also progresses towards the
solution. All other steps are considered negative. Labelers were not given ref-
erence solutions, but they were given the ground truth final answers. We chose
not to provide reference solutions to avoid biasing them towards one particular
path to the solution. We chose to provide ground truth final answers since this
information can sometimes help labelers resolve their own misunderstandings.
    In phase 1, labelers were permitted to enter their own steps in the case that
all candidate steps were negative. Then the solution would progress from a
randomly selected positive step (or neutral if their were no positive ones).
This often resulted in trajectories that got stuck in endless sequences of neutral
steps that said reasonable things but made frustratingly slow progress towards a
solution or negative steps that needed constant human supervision. In phase 2,
we pre-generate whole solutions and end the task as soon as the first negative
step is encountered. The full instructions given to labelers can be found at
https://github.com/openai/prm800k/tree/main/prm800k/instructions.


E     ORM Training Details
We train outcome-supervised reward models in the same manner as token-level
verifiers from Cobbe et al. (2021), with a few subtle differences to hyperparam-
eters. In particular, we only train for a single epoch on each dataset of model
samples and reward model labels, without dropout, and without jointly learn-
ing a language modeling objective. We find that performance is not sensitive to
most other hyperparameters, within a reasonable range.
    To collect model samples, we simply sample uniformly from the generator at
a temperature of 1.0 without applying any rebalancing of positives or negatives.
At training time, the reward model makes predictions for every token in the
context. The target for each token in a solution is the same, based on whether
the solution is labelled correct or incorrect. At test time, we simply use the
score of the final token in the completion as the overall score of the solution.
We note that this setup is identical to the way token-level verifiers were trained
in Cobbe et al. (2021).




                                       19
