                                                                  Let’s Verify Step by Step

                                               Hunter Lightman∗       Vineet Kosaraju∗      Yura Burda∗      Harri Edwards
arXiv:2305.20050v1 [cs.LG] 31 May 2023




                                             Bowen Baker      Teddy Lee       Jan Leike     John Schulman       Ilya Sutskever

                                                                                Karl Cobbe∗


                                                                                 OpenAI



                                                                                Abstract
                                                    In recent years, large language models have greatly improved in their
                                                ability to perform complex multi-step reasoning. However, even state-
                                                of-the-art models still regularly produce logical mistakes. To train more
                                                reliable models, we can turn either to outcome supervision, which provides
                                                feedback for a final result, or process supervision, which provides feedback
                                                for each intermediate reasoning step. Given the importance of training
                                                reliable models, and given the high cost of human feedback, it is impor-
                                                tant to carefully compare the both methods. Recent work has already
                                                begun this comparison, but many questions still remain. We conduct our
                                                own investigation, finding that process supervision significantly outper-
                                                forms outcome supervision for training models to solve problems from the
                                                challenging MATH dataset. Our process-supervised model solves 78% of
                                                problems from a representative subset of the MATH test set. Additionally,
                                                we show that active learning significantly improves the efficacy of process
                                                supervision. To support related research, we also release PRM800K, the
                                                complete dataset of 800,000 step-level human feedback labels used to train
                                                our best reward model.


                                         1      Introduction
                                         Large language models are capable of solving tasks that require complex multi-
                                         step reasoning by generating solutions in a step-by-step chain-of-thought format
                                         (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022). However, even state-
                                         of-the-art models are prone to producing falsehoods — they exhibit a tendency
                                         to invent facts in moments of uncertainty (Bubeck et al., 2023). These hallu-
                                         cinations (Maynez et al., 2020) are particularly problematic in domains that
                                         require multi-step reasoning, since a single logical error is enough to derail a
                                         much larger solution. Detecting and mitigating hallucinations is essential to
                                         improve reasoning capabilities.
                                             ∗ Primary authors. Correspondence to: Karl Cobbe <karl@openai.com>




                                                                                     1
    One effective method involves training reward models to discriminate be-
tween desirable and undesirable outputs. The reward model can then be used
in a reinforcement learning pipeline (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020;
Nakano et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022) or to perform search via rejection sam-
pling (Nichols et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021). While these
techniques are useful, the resulting system is only as reliable as the reward
model itself. It is therefore important that we study how to most effectively
train reliable reward models.
    In closely related work, Uesato et al. (2022) describe two distinct meth-
ods for training reward models: outcome supervision and process supervision.
Outcome-supervised reward models (ORMs) are trained using only the final
result of the model’s chain-of-thought, while process-supervised reward models
(PRMs) receive feedback for each step in the chain-of-thought. There are com-
pelling reasons to favor process supervision. It provides more precise feedback,
since it specifies the exact location of any errors that occur. It also has sev-
eral advantages relevant to AI alignment: it is easier for humans to interpret,
and it more directly rewards models for following a human-endorsed chain-of-
thought. Within the domain of logical reasoning, models trained with outcome
supervision regularly use incorrect reasoning to reach the correct final answer
(Zelikman et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2022). Process supervision has been
shown to mitigate this misaligned behavior (Uesato et al., 2022).
    Despite these advantages, Uesato et al. (2022) found that outcome supervi-
sion and process supervision led to similar final performance in the domain of
grade school math. We conduct our own detailed comparison of outcome and
process supervision, with three main differences: we use a more capable base
model, we use significantly more human feedback, and we train and test on the
more challenging MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021).
    Our main contributions are as follows:

  1. We show that process supervision can train much more reliable reward
     models than outcome supervision. We use our state-of-the-art PRM to
     solve 78.2% of problems from a representative subset of the MATH test
     set.
  2. We show that a large reward model can reliably approximate human su-
     pervision for smaller reward models, and that it can be used to efficiently
     conduct large-scale data collection ablations.

  3. We show that active learning leads to a 2.6× improvement in the data
     efficiency of process supervision.
  4. We release our full process supervision dataset, PRM800K, to promote
     related research.




                                        2
2     Methods
We perform a comparison of outcome and process supervision, following a sim-
ilar methodology to Uesato et al. (2022). Outcome supervision can be provided
without humans, since all problems in the MATH dataset have automatically
checkable answers. In contrast, there is no simple way to automate process su-
pervision. We therefore rely on human data-labelers to provide process super-
vision, specifically by labelling the correctness of each step in model-generated
solutions.
    We conduct experiments in two separate regimes: large-scale and small-
scale. Each has its own advantages, and they offer complimentary perspectives.
At large-scale, we finetune all models from GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). We focus
on advancing the state-of-the-art by training the most reliable ORM and PRM
possible. Unfortunately the training sets for these reward models are not directly
comparable, for reasons we will discuss in Section 3. These models are therefore
not ideal for making an apples-to-apples comparison of outcome and process
supervision. To address this flaw, we also train models at small-scale, where
we can conduct a more direct comparison. In order to remove our dependence
on costly human feedback, we use a large-scale model to supervise small-scale
model training. This setup enables us to conduct several important ablations
that would otherwise be infeasible.

2.1    Scope
At each model scale, we use a single fixed model to generate all solutions. We
call this model the generator. We do not attempt to improve the generator with
reinforcement learning (RL). When we discuss outcome and process supervision,
we are specifically referring to the supervision given to the reward model. We do
not discuss any supervision the generator would receive from the reward model
if trained with RL. Although finetuning the generator with RL is a natural next
step, it is intentionally not the focus of this work.
     We instead focus exclusively on how to train the most reliable reward model
possible. We evaluate a reward model by its ability to perform best-of-N search
over uniformly sampled solutions from the generator. For each test problem we
select the solution ranked highest by the reward model, automatically grade it
based on its final answer, and report the fraction that are correct. A reward
model that is more reliable will select the correct solution more often.

2.2    Base Models
All large-scale models are finetuned from the base GPT-4 model (OpenAI, 2023).
This model has been pretrained solely to predict the next token; it has not been
pretrained with any Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Christiano et al., 2017). The small-scale base models are similar in design to
GPT-4, but they were pretrained with roughly 200 times less compute. As an
additional pretraining step, we finetune all models on a dataset of roughly 1.5B


                                        3
Figure 1: A screenshot of the interface used to collect feedback for each step in
a solution.


math-relevant tokens, which we call MathMix. Similar to Lewkowycz et al.
(2022), we find that this improves the model’s mathematical reasoning capabil-
ities. Details on how this dataset was constructed can be found in Appendix A.

2.3    Generator
To make parsing individual steps easier, we train the generator to produce
solutions in a newline delimited step-by-step format. Specifically, we few-shot
generate solutions to MATH training problems, filter to those that reach the
correct final answer, and finetune the base model on this dataset for a single
epoch. This step is not intended to teach the generator new skills; it is intended
only to teach the generator to produce solutions in the desired format.

2.4    Data Collection
To collect process supervision data, we present human data-labelers with step-
by-step solutions to MATH problems sampled by the large-scale generator.
Their task is to assign each step in the solution a label of positive, negative,
or neutral, as shown in Figure 1. A positive label indicates that the step is cor-
rect and reasonable. A negative label indicates that the step is either incorrect
or unreasonable. A neutral label indicates ambiguity. In practice, a step may
be labelled neutral if it is subtly misleading, or if it is a poor suggestion that
is technically still valid. We permit neutral labels since this allows us to defer
the decision about how to handle ambiguity: at test time, we can treat neutral
labels as either positive or negative. A more detailed description of the labelling
instructions is provided in Appendix D.
    We label solutions exclusively from the large-scale generator in order to
maximize the value of our limited human-data resource. We refer to the en-
tire dataset of step-level labels collected as PRM800K. The PRM800K training
set contains 800K step-level labels across 75K solutions to 12K problems. To


                                        4
