{
  "name": "scaling-v1.pdf",
  "url": "https://arxiv.org/pdf/2001.08361v1",
  "bytes": 2493004,
  "sha256": "a41bd7877fd1a6bcbba096b2619618bd2f90e02488f2365644903eb2f7c6a494"
}
Text extracted by pdftotext -layout, inspected by /root/natural_factual_20_2.

EXTRACTED TEXT LINES 80-132
paragraph prompted text samples [RWC+ 19].
One might expect language modeling performance to depend on model architecture, the size of neural models,
the computing power used to train them, and the data available for this training process. In this work we will
empirically investigate the dependence of language modeling loss on all of these factors, focusing on the
Transformer architecture [VSP+ 17, LSP+ 18]. The high ceiling and low floor for performance on language
tasks allows us to study trends over more than seven orders of magnitude in scale.
Throughout we will observe precise power-law scalings for performance as a function of training time, con-
text length, dataset size, model size, and compute budget.

1.1       Summary

Our key findings for Transformer language models are are as follows:

      2
    Here we display predicted compute when using a sufficiently small batch size. See Figure 13 for comparison to the
purely empirical data.


                                                         2
Test Loss




                 Compute                           Dataset Size                         Parameters
            PF-days, non-embedding                        tokens                        non-embedding

Figure 1 Language modeling performance improves smoothly as we increase the model size, datasetset
size, and amount of compute2 used for training. For optimal performance all three factors must be scaled
up in tandem. Empirical performance has a power-law relationship with each individual factor when not
bottlenecked by the other two.


Performance depends strongly on scale, weakly on model shape: Model performance depends most
strongly on scale, which consists of three factors: the number of model parameters N (excluding embed-
dings), the size of the dataset D, and the amount of compute C used for training. Within reasonable limits,
performance depends very weakly on other architectural hyperparameters such as depth vs. width. (Section
3)

Smooth power laws: Performance has a power-law relationship with each of the three scale factors
N, D, C when not bottlenecked by the other two, with trends spanning more than six orders of magnitude
(see Figure 1). We observe no signs of deviation from these trends on the upper end, though performance
must flatten out eventually before reaching zero loss. (Section 3)

Universality of overfitting: Performance improves predictably as long as we scale up N and D in tandem,
but enters a regime of diminishing returns if either N or D is held fixed while the other increases. The
performance penalty depends predictably on the ratio N 0.74 /D, meaning that every time we increase the
model size 8x, we only need to increase the data by roughly 5x to avoid a penalty. (Section 4)

Universality of training: Training curves follow predictable power-laws whose parameters are roughly
independent of the model size. By extrapolating the early part of a training curve, we can roughly predict the
loss that would be achieved if we trained for much longer. (Section 5)
