Original pdftotext -layout excerpt, lines 176–277; paper pages 3–5
                   πθ


                                                    3
where β is a parameter controlling the deviation from the base reference policy πref , namely the ini-
tial SFT model π SFT . In practice, the language model policy πθ is also initialized to π SFT . The
added constraint is important, as it prevents the model from deviating too far from the distri-
bution on which the reward model is accurate, as well as maintaining the generation diversity
and preventing mode-collapse to single high-reward answers. Due to the discrete nature of lan-
guage generation, this objective is not differentiable and is typically optimized with reinforce-
ment learning. The standard approach [51, 40, 1, 28] has been to construct the reward function
r(x, y) = rϕ (x, y) − β(log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x)), and maximize using PPO [39].

4   Direct Preference Optimization
Motivated by the challenges of applying reinforcement learning algorithms on large-scale problems
such as fine-tuning language models, our goal is to derive a simple approach for policy optimization
using preferences directly. Unlike prior RLHF methods, which learn a reward and then optimize it
via RL, our approach leverages a particular choice of reward model parameterization that enables
extraction of its optimal policy in closed form, without an RL training loop. As we will describe
next in detail, our key insight is to leverage an analytical mapping from reward functions to optimal
policies, which enables us to transform a loss function over reward functions into a loss function
over policies. This change-of-variables approach avoids fitting an explicit, standalone reward model,
while still optimizing under existing models of human preferences, such as the Bradley-Terry model.
In essence, the policy network represents both the language model and the (implicit) reward.
Deriving the DPO objective. We start with the same RL objective as prior work, Eq. 3, under a
general reward function r. Following prior work [31, 30, 19, 15], it is straightforward to show that
the optimal solution to the KL-constrained reward maximization objective in Eq. 3 takes the form:
                                                                           
                                            1                      1
                             πr (y | x) =       πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y) ,                     (4)
                                          Z(x)                     β
                                                
where Z(x) = y πref (y | x) exp β1 r(x, y) is the partition function. See Appendix A.1 for a
                  P

complete derivation. Even if we use the MLE estimate rϕ of the ground-truth reward function r∗ , it is
still expensive to estimate the partition function Z(x) [19, 15], which makes this representation hard
to utilize in practice. However, we can rearrange Eq. 4 to express the reward function in terms of its
corresponding optimal policy πr , the reference policy πref , and the unknown partition function Z(·).
Specifically, we first take the logarithm of both sides of Eq. 4 and then with some algebra we obtain:
                                                πr (y | x)
                              r(x, y) = β log                + β log Z(x).                          (5)
                                                πref (y | x)
We can apply this reparameterization to the ground-truth reward r∗ and corresponding optimal model
π ∗ . Fortunately, the Bradley-Terry model depends only on the difference of rewards between two
completions, i.e., p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) = σ(r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 )). Substituting the reparameterization
in Eq. 5 for r∗ (x, y) into the preference model Eq. 1, the partition function cancels, and we can
express the human preference probability in terms of only the optimal policy π ∗ and reference policy
πref . Thus, the optimal RLHF policy π ∗ under the Bradley-Terry model satisfies the preference model:
                                                                   1
                   p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) =                         ∗
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                                   2 |x)         π ∗ (y1 |x)
                                        1 + exp       β log ππref(y
                                                                 (y2 |x) − β log πref (y1 |x)

The derivation is in Appendix A.2. While Eq. 6 uses the Bradley-Terry model, we can similarly
derive expressions under the more general Plackett-Luce models [32, 23], shown in Appendix A.3.
Now that we have the probability of human preference data in terms of the optimal policy rather than
the reward model, we can formulate a maximum likelihood objective for a parametrized policy πθ .
Analogous to the reward modeling approach (i.e. Eq. 2), our policy objective becomes:
                                                                                         
                                                       πθ (yw | x)           πθ (yl | x)
       LDPO (πθ ; πref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ β log               − β log                  .   (7)
                                                       πref (yw | x)         πref (yl | x)
This way, we fit an implicit reward using an alternative parameterization, whose optimal policy is
simply πθ . Moreover, since our procedure is equivalent to fitting a reparametrized Bradley-Terry


                                                       4
model, it enjoys certain theoretical properties, such as consistencies under suitable assumption of the
preference data distribution [4]. In Section 5, we further discuss theoretical properties of DPO in
relation to other works.
What does the DPO update do? For a mechanistic understanding of DPO, it is useful to analyze the
gradient of the loss function LDPO . The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:

    ∇θ LDPO (πθ ; πref ) =
                                                                                                             
    − βE(x,yw ,yl )∼D      σ(r̂θ (x, yl ) − r̂θ (x, yw ))                  ∇θ log π(yw | x) − ∇θ log π(yl | x) ,
                           |             {z             }                  |      {z      }   |     {z       }
                         higher weight when reward estimate is wrong       increase likelihood of yw   decrease likelihood of yl

where r̂θ (x, y) = β log ππrefθ (y|x)
                                (y|x) is the reward implicitly defined by the language model πθ and refer-
ence model πref (more in Section 5). Intuitively, the gradient of the loss function LDPO increases the
likelihood of the preferred completions yw and decreases the likelihood of dispreferred completions
yl . Importantly, the examples are weighed by how much higher the implicit reward model r̂θ rates
the dispreferred completions, scaled by β, i.e, how incorrectly the implicit reward model orders
the completions, accounting for the strength of the KL constraint. Our experiments suggest the
importance of this weighting, as a naïve version of this method without the weighting coefficient can
cause the language model to degenerate (Appendix Table 3).
DPO outline. The general DPO pipeline is as follows: 1) Sample completions y1 , y2 ∼ πref (· | x)
for every prompt x, label with human preferences to construct the offline dataset of preferences
              (i)
D = {x(i) , yw , yl )(i) }N
                          i=1 and 2) optimize the language model πθ to minimize LDPO for the given
πref and D and desired β. In practice, one would like to reuse preference datasets publicly available,
rather than generating samples and gathering human preferences. Since the preference datasets
are sampled using π SFT , we initialize πref = π SFT whenever available. However, when π SFT is
not available, we initialize πref by maximizing likelihood of preferred completions (x, yw ), that
