HTML page 1
Chapter 5 Mac hine Learning Basics Deep learning is a sp eciﬁc kind of mac hine learning. T o understand deep learning w ell, one m ust ha v e a solid understanding of the basic principles of mac hine learning. This c hapter pro vides a brief course in the most important general principles that are applied throughout the rest of the b o ok. Novice readers or those who wan t a wider p ersp ective are encouraged to consider mac hine learning textb o oks with a more comprehensiv e co v erage of the fundamen tals, such as Murphy ( 2012 ) or Bishop ( 2006 ). If you are already familiar with machine learning basics, feel free to skip ahead to section 5.11 . That section cov ers some p ersp ectiv es on traditional machine learning techniques that ha v e strongly inﬂuenced the developmen t of deep learning algorithms. W e b egin with a deﬁnition of what a learning algorithm is and present an example: the linear regression algorithm. W e then pro ceed to describ e ho w the c hallenge of ﬁtting the training data diﬀers from the c hallenge of ﬁnding patterns that generalize to new data. Most machine learning algorithms hav e settings called hyp erp ar ameters , whic h m ust b e determined outside the learning algorithm itself; we discuss ho w to set these using additional data. Mac hine learning is essen tially a form of applied statistics with increased emphasis on the use of computers to statistically estimate complicated functions and a decreased emphasis on proving conﬁdence interv als around these functions; we therefore present the t w o cen tral approaches to statistics: frequentist estimators and Bay esian inference. Most mac hine learning algorithms can b e divided into the categories of sup ervised learning and unsup ervised learning; w e describ e these categories and give some examples of simple learning algorithms from each category . Most deep learning algorithms are based on an optimization algorithm called sto c hastic gradient 96

HTML page 2
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS descen t. W e describ e how to combine v arious algorithm comp onents, such as an optimization algorithm, a cost function, a mo del, and a dataset, to build a mac hine learning algorithm. Finally , in section 5.11 , w e describ e some of the factors that hav e limited the ability of traditional machine learning to generalize. These c hallenges hav e motiv ated the developmen t of deep learning algorithms that o v ercome these obstacles. 5.1 Learning Algorithms A mac hine learning algorithm is an algorithm that is able to learn from data. But what do w e mean b y learning? Mitchell ( 1997 ) provides a succinct deﬁnition: “A computer program is said to learn from exp erience E with resp ect to some class of tasks T and p erformance measure P , if its p erformance at tasks in T , as measured b y P , impro v es with exp erience E .” One can imagine a wide v ariet y of exp eriences E , tasks T , and p erformance measures P , and we do not attempt in this b o ok to formally deﬁne what ma y b e used for each of these en tities. Instead, in the follo wing sections, we provide intuitiv e descriptions and examples of the diﬀeren t kinds of tasks, p erformance measures, and exp eriences that can b e used to construct machine learning algorithms. 5.1.1 The T ask, T Mac hine learning enables us to tackle tasks that are to o diﬃcult to solve with ﬁxed programs written and designed b y h uman b eings. F rom a scientiﬁc and philosophical p oin t of view, machine learning is in teresting b ecause developing our understanding of it en tails developing our understanding of the principles that underlie intelligence. In this relatively formal deﬁnition of the word “task,” the pro cess of learning itself is not the task. Learning is our means of attaining the ability to p erform the task. F or example, if we w an t a rob ot to b e able to walk, then w alking is the task. W e could program the rob ot to learn to walk, or we could attempt to directly write a program that sp eciﬁes how to w alk man ually . Mac hine learning tasks are usually describ ed in terms of how the mac hine learning system should pro cess an example . An example is a collection of features that hav e b een quantitativ ely measured from some ob ject or even t that w e w an t the machine learning system to pro cess. W e t ypically represent an example as a v ector x ∈ R n where each entry x i of the vector is another feature. F or example, the features of an image are usually the v alues of the pixels in the image. 97

HTML page 3
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Man y kinds of tasks can b e solved with mac hine learning. Some of the most common machine learning tasks include the follo wing: • Classiﬁcation : In this t yp e of task, the computer program is ask ed to sp ecify whic h of k categories some input b elongs to. T o solve this task, the learning algorithm is usually asked to pro duce a function f : R n → { 1 , . . . , k } . When y = f ( x ) , the mo del assigns an input describ ed b y vector x to a category iden tiﬁed by numeric co de y . There are other v arian ts of the classiﬁcation task, for example, where f outputs a probabilit y distribution ov er classes. An example of a classiﬁcation task is ob ject recognition, where the input is an image (usually describ ed as a set of pixel brightness v alues), and the output is a numeric co de identifying the ob ject in the image. F or example, the Willow Garage PR2 rob ot is able to act as a waiter that can recognize diﬀeren t kinds of drinks and deliv er them to p eople on command ( Go o d- fello w et al. , 2010 ). Mo dern ob ject recognition is b est accomplished with deep learning ( Krizhevsky et al. , 2012 ; Ioﬀe and Szegedy , 2015 ). Ob ject recognition is the same basic technology that enables computers to recognize faces ( T aigman et al. , 2014 ), which can b e used to automatically tag p eople in photo collections and for computers to in teract more naturally with their users. • Classiﬁcation with missing inputs : Classiﬁcation b ecomes more chal- lenging if the computer program is not guaran teed that every measurement in its input v ector will alw a ys b e pro vided. T o solve the classiﬁcation task, the learning algorithm only has to deﬁne a single function mapping from a vector input to a categorical output. When some of the inputs may b e missing, rather than pro viding a single classiﬁcation function, the learning algorithm m ust learn a set of functions. Each function corresp onds to classifying x with a diﬀerent subset of its inputs missing. This kind of situation arises frequen tly in medical diagnosis, b ecause man y kinds of medical tests are exp ensive or in v asive. One w a y to eﬃciently deﬁne such a large set of functions is to learn a probabilit y distribution ov er all the relev ant v ariables, then solve the classiﬁcation task b y marginalizing out the missing v ariables. With n input v ariables, we can now obtain all 2 n diﬀeren t classiﬁcation functions needed for each p ossible set of missing inputs, but the computer program needs to learn only a single function describing the joint probabilit y distribution. See Go o dfellow et al. ( 2013b ) for an example of a deep probabilistic mo del applied to such a task in this wa y . Many of the other tasks describ ed in this section can also b e generalized to w ork with missing inputs; classiﬁcation with missing inputs is just one example of what machine learning can do. 98

HTML page 4
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS • Regression : In this type of task, the computer program is ask ed to predict a n umerical v alue given some input. T o solve this task, the learning algorithm is ask ed to output a function f : R n → R . This type of task is similar to classiﬁcation, except that the format of output is diﬀerent. An example of a regression task is the prediction of the exp ected claim amount that an insured p erson will mak e (used to set insurance premiums), or the prediction of future prices of securities. These kinds of predictions are also used for algorithmic trading. • T ranscription : In this type of task, the mac hine learning system is asked to observ e a relativ ely unstructured representation of some kind of data and transcrib e the information into discrete textual form. F or example, in optical c haracter recognition, the computer program is sho wn a photograph con taining an image of text and is asked to return this text in the form of a sequence of characters (e.g., in ASCI I or Unico de format). Go ogle Street View uses deep learning to pro cess address num b ers in this wa y ( Go o dfellow et al. , 2014d ). Another example is sp eec h recognition, where the computer program is pro vided an audio w a v eform and emits a sequence of characters or w ord ID co des describing the w ords that were sp oken in the audio recording. Deep learning is a crucial comp onent of mo dern sp eech recognition systems used at ma jor companies, including Microsoft, IBM and Go ogle ( Hin ton et al. , 2012b ). • Mac hine translation : In a mac hine translation task, the input already consists of a sequence of symbols in some language, and the computer program m ust con v ert this into a sequence of symbols in another language. This is commonly applied to natural languages, such as translating from English to F renc h. Deep learning has recently b egun to hav e an imp ortan t impact on this kind of task ( Sutskev er et al. , 2014 ; Bahdanau et al. , 2015 ). • Structured output : Structured output tasks inv olve any task where the output is a vector (or other data structure con taining multiple v alues) with imp ortan t relationships betw een the diﬀeren t elements. This is a broad category and subsumes the transcription and translation tasks describ ed ab o v e, as well as man y other tasks. One example is parsing—mapping a natural language sen tence in to a tree that describ es its grammatical structure b y tagging no des of the trees as b eing verbs, nouns, adv erbs, and so on. See Collob ert ( 2011 ) for an example of deep learning applied to a parsing task. Another example is pixel-wise segmen tation of images, where the computer program assigns every pixel in an image to a sp eciﬁc category . 99

HTML page 5
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS F or example, deep learning can b e used to annotate the lo cations of roads in aerial photographs ( Mnih and Hinton , 2010 ). The output form need not mirror the structure of the input as closely as in these annotation-st yle tasks. F or example, in image captioning, the computer program observes an image and outputs a natural language sentence describing the image ( Kiros et al. , 2014a , b ; Mao et al. , 2015 ; Viny als et al. , 2015b ; Donahue et al. , 2014 ; Karpath y and Li , 2015 ; F ang et al. , 2015 ; Xu et al. , 2015 ). These tasks are called structur e d output tasks b ecause the program must output several v alues that are all tigh tly in terrelated. F or example, the w ords pro duced b y an image captioning program must form a v alid sentence. • Anomaly detection : In this type of task, the computer program sifts through a set of ev en ts or ob jects and ﬂags some of them as b eing unusual or atypical. An example of an anomaly detection task is credit card fraud detection. By mo deling your purc hasing habits, a credit card company can detect misuse of your cards. If a thief steals your credit card or credit card information, the thief ’s purchases will often come from a diﬀeren t probabilit y distribution ov er purchase t yp es than your o wn. The credit card company can prev en t fraud by placing a hold on an account as so on as that card has b een used for an unc haracteristic purc hase. See Chandola et al. ( 2009 ) for a surv ey of anomaly detection metho ds. • Syn thesis and sampling : In this t yp e of task, the machine learning al- gorithm is asked to generate new examples that are similar to those in the training data. Syn thesis and sampling via mac hine learning can b e useful for media applications when generating large volumes of conten t by hand w ould b e exp ensive, b oring, or require to o muc h time. F or example, video games can automatically generate textures for large ob jects or landscap es, rather than requiring an artist to man ually lab el each pixel ( Luo et al. , 2013 ). In some cases, w e w an t the sampling or synthesis pro cedure to generate a sp eciﬁc kind of output given the input. F or example, in a sp eech syn thesis task, we pro vide a written sen tence and ask the program to emit an audio w a v eform containing a sp oken v ersion of that sentence. This is a kind of structured output task, but with the added qualiﬁcation that there is no single correct output for each input, and we explicitly desire a large amount of v ariation in the output, in order for the output to seem more natural and realistic. • Imputation of missing v alues : In this type of task, the machine learning algorithm is given a new example x ∈ R n , but with some entries x i of x 100

HTML page 6
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS missing. The algorithm must pro vide a prediction of the v alues of the missing en tries. • Denoising : In this t yp e of task, the mac hine learning algorithm is giv en as input a c orrupte d example ˜ x ∈ R n obtained b y an unkno wn corruption pro cess from a cle an example x ∈ R n . The learner m ust predict the clean example x from its corrupted v ersion ˜ x , or more generally predict the conditional probabilit y distribution p ( x | ˜ x ) . • Densit y estimation or probabilit y mass function estimation : In the densit y estimation problem, the mac hine learning algorithm is asked to learn a function p model : R n → R , where p model ( x ) can b e interpreted as a probability densit y function (if x is contin uous) or a probability mass function (if x is discrete) on the space that the examples were dra wn from. T o do such a task w ell (w e will sp ecify exactly what that means when w e discuss p erformance measures P ), the algorithm needs to learn the structure of the data it has seen. It m ust kno w where examples cluster tigh tly and where they are unlik ely to o ccur. Most of the tasks describ ed ab o v e require the learning algorithm to at least implicitly capture the structure of the probabilit y distribution. Density estimation enables us to explicitly capture that distribution. In principle, w e can then p erform computations on that distribution to solve the other tasks as well. F or example, if w e hav e p erformed densit y estimation to obtain a probabilit y distribution p ( x ) , we can use that distribution to solv e the missing v alue imputation task. If a v alue x i is missing, and all the other v alues, denoted x − i , are giv en, then w e know the distribution ov er it is giv en b y p ( x i | x − i ) . In practice, density estimation do es not alwa ys enable us to solv e all these related tasks, b ecause in many cases the required op erations on p ( x ) are computationally intractable. Of course, many other tasks and types of tasks are p ossible. The t yp es of tasks w e list here are in tended only to provide examples of what mac hine learning can do, not to deﬁne a rigid taxonom y of tasks. 5.1.2 The P erformance Measure, P T o ev aluate the abilities of a mac hine learning algorithm, we m ust design a quan titativ e measure of its p erformance. Usually this p erformance measure P is sp eciﬁc to the task T b eing carried out by the system. F or tasks such as classiﬁcation, classiﬁcation with missing inputs, and tran- scription, we often measure the accuracy of the model. Accuracy is just the 101

HTML page 7
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS prop ortion of examples for whic h the mo del pro duces the correct output. W e can also obtain equiv alent information by measuring the error rate , the prop ortion of examples for which the mo del pro duces an incorrect output. W e often refer to the error rate as the exp ected 0-1 loss. The 0-1 loss on a particular example is 0 if it is correctly classiﬁed and 1 if it is not. F or tasks such as density estimation, it do es not make sense to measure accuracy , error rate, or any other kind of 0-1 loss. Instead, we m ust use a diﬀerent p erformance metric that gives the mo del a contin uous-v alued score for each example. The most common approach is to rep ort the av erage log-probability the mo del assigns to some examples. Usually w e are interested in how well the mac hine learning algorithm p erforms on data that it has not seen b efore, since this determines how well it will work when deplo y ed in the real world. W e therefore ev aluate these p erformance measures using a test set of data that is separate from the data used for training the machine learning system. The choice of p erformance measure ma y seem straightforw ard and ob jectiv e, but it is often diﬃcult to c ho ose a p erformance measure that corresp onds w ell to the desired b ehavior of the system. In some cases, this is b ecause it is diﬃcult to decide what should b e measured. F or example, when p erforming a transcription task, should we measure the accuracy of the system at transcribing en tire sequences, or should w e use a more ﬁne-grained p erformance measure that giv es partial credit for getting some elements of the sequence correct? When p erforming a regression task, should we p enalize the system more if it frequen tly makes medium-sized mistak es or if it rarely makes v ery large mistakes? These kinds of design c hoices dep end on the application. In other cases, we kno w what quantit y we would ideally like to measure, but measuring it is impractical. F or example, this arises frequen tly in the con text of densit y estimation. Many of the b est probabilistic mo dels represent probability distributions only implicitly . Computing the actual probability v alue assigned to a sp eciﬁc p oint in space in man y suc h mo dels is in tractable. In these cases, one m ust design an alternative criterion that still corresp onds to the design ob jectives, or design a go o d approximation to the desired criterion. 5.1.3 The Exp erience, E Mac hine learning algorithms can be broadly categorized as unsup ervised or sup ervised b y what kind of exp erience they are allo wed to hav e during the learning pro cess. Most of the learning algorithms in this b o ok can b e understo o d as b eing allo w ed 102

HTML page 8
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS to exp erience an en tire dataset . A dataset is a collection of many examples, as deﬁned in section 5.1.1 . Sometimes we call examples data p oints . One of the oldest datasets studied by statisticians and machine learning re- searc hers is the Iris dataset ( Fisher , 1936 ). It is a collection of measurements of diﬀeren t parts of 150 iris plants. Eac h individual plant corresp onds to one example. The features within each example are the measurements of each part of the plant: the sepal length, sepal width, p etal length and p etal width. The dataset also records which sp ecies each plant b elonged to. Three diﬀeren t sp ecies are represented in the dataset. Unsup ervised learning algorithms exp erience a dataset con taining many features, then learn useful prop erties of the structure of this dataset. In the con text of deep learning, we usually wan t to learn the entire probabilit y distribution that generated a dataset, whether explicitly , as in density estimation, or implicitly , for tasks like synthesis or denoising. Some other unsup ervised learning algorithms p erform other roles, lik e clustering, which consists of dividing the dataset in to clusters of similar examples. Sup ervised learning algorithms exp erience a dataset containing features, but eac h example is also asso ciated with a lab el or target . F or example, the Iris dataset is annotated with the sp ecies of each iris plant. A sup ervised learning algorithm can study the Iris dataset and learn to classify iris plants in to three diﬀeren t sp ecies based on their measurements. Roughly sp eaking, unsup ervised learning in v olves observing several examples of a random v ector x and attempting to implicitly or explicitly learn the proba- bilit y distribution p ( x ) , or some interesting prop erties of that distribution; while sup ervised learning in v olv es observing sev eral examples of a random v ector x and an asso ciated v alue or v ector y , then learning to predict y from x , usually b y estimating p ( y | x ) . The term sup ervised learning originates from the view of the target y b eing provided by an instructor or teac her who shows the mac hine learning system what to do. In unsup ervised learning, there is no instructor or teac her, and the algorithm must learn to mak e sense of the data without this guide. Unsup ervised learning and sup ervised learning are not formally deﬁned terms. The lines betw een them are often blurred. Man y mac hine learning technologies can b e used to p erform b oth tasks. F or example, the chain rule of probability states that for a vector x ∈ R n , the joint distribution can b e decomp osed as p ( x ) = n  i =1 p ( x i | x 1 , . . . , x i − 1 ) . (5.1) This decomp osition means that w e can solve the ostensibly unsup ervised problem of 103

HTML page 9
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS mo deling p ( x ) b y splitting it in to n sup ervised learning problems. Alternativ ely , w e can solv e the sup ervised learning problem of learning p ( y | x ) b y using traditional unsup ervised learning technologies to learn the joint distribution p ( x , y ) , then inferring p ( y | x ) = p ( x , y )  y  p ( x , y  ) . (5.2) Though unsup ervised learning and sup ervised learning are not completely formal or distinct concepts, they do help roughly categorize some of the things we do with mac hine learning algorithms. T raditionally , p eople refer to regression, classiﬁcation and structured output problems as sup ervised learning. Densit y estimation in supp ort of other tasks is usually considered unsup ervised learning. Other v arian ts of the learning paradigm are p ossible. F or example, in semi- sup ervised learning, some examples include a sup ervision target but others do not. In multi-instance learning, an entire collection of examples is lab eled as con taining or not containing an example of a class, but the individual members of the collection are not lab eled. F or a recent example of multi-instance learning with deep mo dels, see Kotzias et al. ( 2015 ). Some mac hine learning algorithms do not just exp erience a ﬁxed dataset. F or example, reinforcemen t learning algorithms interact with an environmen t, so there is a feedback lo op b etw een the learning system and its exp eriences. Such algorithms are b ey ond the scop e of this b o ok. Please see Sutton and Barto ( 1998 ) or Bertsek as and T sitsiklis ( 1996 ) for information ab out reinforcement learning, and Mnih et al. ( 2013 ) for the deep learning approach to reinforcement learning. Most mac hine learning algorithms simply exp erience a dataset. A dataset can b e describ ed in many wa ys. In all cases, a dataset is a collection of examples, whic h are in turn collections of features. One common wa y of describing a dataset is with a design matrix . A design matrix is a matrix containing a diﬀerent example in each ro w. Each column of the matrix corresp onds to a diﬀeren t feature. F or instance, the Iris dataset contains 150 examples with four features for each example. This means w e can represent the dataset with a design matrix X ∈ R 150 × 4 , where X i, 1 is the sepal length of plan t i , X i, 2 is the sepal width of plant i , etc. W e describ e most of the learning algorithms in this b o ok in terms of how they op erate on design matrix datasets. Of course, to describ e a dataset as a design matrix, it m ust b e p ossible to describ e each example as a vector, and each of these vecto rs must b e the same size. This is not alwa ys p ossible. F or example, if y ou hav e a collection of photographs with diﬀeren t widths and heigh ts, then diﬀeren t photographs will contain diﬀerent n um b ers of pixels, so not all the photographs ma y b e describ ed with the same 104

HTML page a
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS length of v ector. In Section 9.7 and c hapter 10 , we describ e how to handle diﬀeren t t yp es of such heterogeneous data. In cases like these, rather than describing the dataset as a matrix with m ro ws, we describ e it as a set con taining m elemen ts: { x (1) , x (2) , . . . , x ( m ) } . This notation do es not imply that an y tw o example v ectors x ( i ) and x ( j ) ha v e the same size. In the case of sup ervised learning, the example contains a lab el or target as w ell as a collection of features. F or example, if w e w an t to use a learning algorithm to p erform ob ject recognition from photographs, we need to sp ecify whic h ob ject app ears in eac h of the photos. W e might do this with a numeric co de, with 0 signifying a p erson, 1 signifying a car, 2 signifying a cat, and so forth. Often when w orking with a dataset containing a design matrix of feature observ ations X , we also provide a vector of lab els y , with y i pro viding the lab el for example i . Of course, sometimes the lab el may b e more than just a single num ber. F or example, if we w an t to train a sp eech recognition system to transcrib e entire sen tences, then the lab el for each example sen tence is a sequence of words. Just as there is no formal deﬁnition of sup ervised and unsup ervised learning, there is no rigid taxonomy of datasets or exp eriences. The structures describ ed here co v er most cases, but it is alwa ys p ossible to design new ones for new applications. 5.1.4 Example: Linear Regression Our deﬁnition of a mac hine learning algorithm as an algorithm that is capable of improving a computer program’s p erformance at some task via exp erience is somewhat abstract. T o make this more concrete, w e present an example of a simple machine learning algorithm: linear regression . W e will return to this example rep eatedly as we introduce more mac hine learning concepts that help to understand the algorithm’s b ehavior. As the name implies, linear regression solves a regression problem. In other w ords, the goal is to build a system that can take a vector x ∈ R n as input and predict the v alue of a scalar y ∈ R as its output. The output of linear regression is a linear function of the input. Let ˆ y b e the v alue that our mo del predicts y should tak e on. W e deﬁne the output to b e ˆ y = w  x , (5.3) where w ∈ R n is a vector of parameters . P arameters are v alues that con trol the b ehavior of the system. In this case, w i is the co eﬃcient that w e multiply by feature x i b efore summing up the contributions from all the features. W e can think of w as a set of w eigh ts that determine how 105

HTML page b
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS eac h feature aﬀects the prediction. If a feature x i receiv es a p ositive weigh t w i , then increasing the v alue of that feature increases the v alue of our prediction ˆ y . If a feature receiv es a negative weigh t, then increasing the v alue of that feature decreases the v alue of our prediction. If a feature’s weigh t is large in magnitude, then it has a large eﬀect on the prediction. If a feature’s weigh t is zero, it has no eﬀect on the prediction. W e th us hav e a deﬁnition of our task T : to predict y from x b y outputting ˆ y = w  x . Next we need a deﬁnition of our p erformance measure, P . Supp ose that we ha v e a design matrix of m example inputs that w e will not use for training, only for ev aluating ho w well the mo del p erforms. W e also hav e a vector of regression targets providing the correct v alue of y for each of these examples. Because this dataset will only b e used for ev aluation, we call it the test set. W e refer to the design matrix of inputs as X ( test ) and the v ector of regression targets as y ( test ) . One w a y of measuring the p erformance of the mo del is to compute the mean squared error of the mo del on the test set. If ˆ y ( test ) giv es the predictions of the mo del on the test set, then the mean squared error is given by MSE test = 1 m  i ( ˆ y ( test ) − y ( test ) ) 2 i . (5.4) In tuitiv ely , one can see that this error measure decreases to 0 when ˆ y ( test ) = y ( test ) . W e can also see that MSE test = 1 m || ˆ y ( test ) − y ( test ) || 2 2 , (5.5) so the error increases whenever the Euclidean distance b etw een the predictions and the targets increases. T o mak e a machine learning algorithm, we need to design an algorithm that will improv e the w eigh ts w in a wa y that reduces MSE test when the algorithm is allow ed to gain exp erience b y observing a training set ( X ( train ) , y ( train ) ) . One in tuitiv e wa y of doing this (whic h we justify later, in section 5.5.1 ) is just to minimize the mean squared error on the training set, MSE train . T o minimize MSE train , w e can simply solve for where its gradient is 0 : ∇ w MSE train = 0 (5.6) ⇒ ∇ w 1 m || ˆ y ( train ) − y ( train ) || 2 2 = 0 (5.7) 106

HTML page c
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS ⇒ 1 m ∇ w || X ( train ) w − y ( train ) || 2 2 = 0 (5.8) ⇒ ∇ w  X ( train ) w − y ( train )    X ( train ) w − y ( train )  = 0 (5.9) ⇒ ∇ w  w  X ( train )  X ( train ) w − 2 w  X ( train )  y ( train ) + y ( train )  y ( train )  = 0 (5.10) ⇒ 2 X ( train )  X ( train ) w − 2 X ( train )  y ( train ) = 0 (5.11) ⇒ w =  X ( train )  X ( train )  − 1 X ( train )  y ( train ) (5.12) The system of equations whose solution is given by equation 5.12 is kno wn as the normal equations . Ev aluating equation 5.12 constitutes a simple learning algorithm. F or an example of the linear regression learning algorithm in action, see ﬁgure 5.1 . It is w orth noting that the term linear regression is often used to refer to a slightly more sophisticated mo del with one additional parameter—an intercept term b . In this mo del ˆ y = w  x + b, (5.13) so the mapping from parameters to predictions is still a linear function but the mapping from features to predictions is now an aﬃne function. This extension to − 1 . 0 − 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 x 1 − 3 − 2 − 1 0 1 2 3 y Linear regression example 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 w 1 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 50 0 . 55 MSE (train) Optimization of w Figure 5.1: A linear regression problem, with a training set consisting of ten data points, eac h containing one feature. Because there is only one feature, the weigh t vector w con tains only a single parameter to learn, w 1 . (L eft) Observe that linear regression learns to set w 1 suc h that the line y = w 1 x comes as close as p ossible to passing through all the training points. (Right) The plotted p oint indicates the v alue of w 1 found b y the normal equations, whic h w e can see minimizes the mean squared error on the training set. 107

HTML page d
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS aﬃne functions means that the plot of the mo del’s predictions still lo oks like a line, but it need not pass through the origin. Instead of adding the bias parameter b , one can contin ue to use the mo del with only w eigh ts but augment x with an extra en try that is alwa ys set to 1 . The w eigh t corresp onding to the extra 1 entry pla ys the role of the bias parameter. W e frequently use the term “linear” when referring to aﬃne functions throughout this b o ok. The intercept term b is often called the bias parameter of the aﬃne transfor- mation. This terminology derives from the p oin t of view that the output of the transformation is biased tow ard b eing b in the absence of any input. This term is diﬀeren t from the idea of a statistical bias, in whic h a statistical estimation algorithm’s exp ected estimate of a quantit y is not equal to the true quantit y . Linear regression is of course an extremely simple and limited learning algorithm, but it provides an example of how a learning algorithm can work. In subsequent sections w e describ e some of the basic principles underlying learning algorithm design and demonstrate ho w these principles can b e used to build more complicated learning algorithms. 5.2 Capacit y , Ov erﬁtting and Underﬁtting The central challenge in machine learning is that our algorithm must p erform w ell on new, pr eviously unse en inputs—not just those on which our mo del was trained. The ability to perform w ell on previously unobserved inputs is called generalization . T ypically , when training a machine learning model, we ha v e access to a training set; we can compute some error measure on the training set, called the training error ; and w e reduce this training error. So far, what we hav e describ ed is simply an optimization problem. What separates mach ine learning from optimization is that w e wan t the generalization error , also called the test error , to b e low as w ell. The generalization error is deﬁned as the exp ected v alue of the error on a new input. Here the exp ectation is tak en across diﬀerent p ossible inputs, dra wn from the distribution of inputs we exp ect the system to encounter in practice. W e typically estimate the generalization error of a machi ne learning mo del b y measuring its p erformance on a test set of examples that w ere collected separately from the training set. In our linear regression example, w e trained the mo del b y minimizing the training error, 1 m ( train ) || X ( train ) w − y ( train ) || 2 2 , (5.14) 108

HTML page e
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS but we actually care ab out the test error, 1 m ( test ) || X ( test ) w − y ( test ) || 2 2 . Ho w can we aﬀect p erformance on the test set when we can observ e only the training set? The ﬁeld of statistical learning theory pro vides some answ ers. If the training and the test set are collected arbitrarily , there is indeed little w e can do. If we are allow ed to make some assumptions ab out ho w the training and test set are collected, then we can mak e some progress. The training and test data are generated by a probability distribution o v er datasets called the data-generating pro cess . W e typically make a set of as- sumptions kno wn collectiv ely as the i.i.d. assumptions . These assumptions are that the examples in each dataset are indep enden t from each other, and that the training set and test set are iden tically distributed , drawn from the same probabilit y distribution as each other. This assumption enables us to describ e the data-generating pro cess with a probability distribution o v er a single example. The same distribution is then used to generate every train example and ev ery test example. W e call that shared underlying distribution the data-generating dis- tribution , denoted p data . This probabilistic framew ork and the i.i.d. assumptions enables us to mathematically study the relationship b etw een training error and test error. One immediate connection w e can observe b etw een training error and test error is that the exp ected training error of a randomly selected mo del is equal to the exp ected test error of that mo del. Supp ose w e hav e a probabilit y distribution p ( x , y ) and w e sample from it rep eatedly to generate the training set and the test set. F or some ﬁxed v alue w , the exp ected training set error is exactly the same as the exp ected test set error, b ecause b oth exp ectations are formed using the same dataset sampling pro cess. The only diﬀerence b etw een the t w o conditions is the name we assign to the dataset w e sample. Of course, when w e use a machine learning algorithm, we do not ﬁx the parameters ahead of time, then sample b oth datasets. W e sample the training set, then use it to c ho ose the parameters to reduce training set error, then sample the test set. Under this pro cess, the exp ected test error is greater than or equal to the exp ected v alue of training error. The factors determining ho w w ell a mac hine learning algorithm will p erform are its abilit y to 1. Mak e the training error small. 2. Mak e the gap b etw een training and test error small. These tw o factors corresp ond to the t w o central c hallenges in mac hine learning: underﬁtting and o v erﬁtting . Underﬁtting o ccurs when the mo del is not able to 109

HTML page f
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS obtain a suﬃciently lo w error v alue on the training set. Ov erﬁtting o ccurs when the gap b etw een the training error and test error is to o large. W e can control whether a mo del is more likely to o v erﬁt or underﬁt by altering its capacit y . Informally , a mo del’s capacit y is its ability to ﬁt a wide v ariety of functions. Models with low capacit y may struggle to ﬁ t the training set. Models with high capacity can ov erﬁt by memorizing prop erties of the training set that do not serve them well on the test set. One wa y to con trol the capacity of a learning algorithm is by c ho osing its h yp othesis space , the set of functions that the learning algorithm is allow ed to select as b eing the solution. F or example, the linear regression algorithm has the set of all linear functions of its input as its hypothesis space. W e can generalize linear regression to include p olynomials, rather than just linear functions, in its h yp othesis space. Doing so increases the mo del’s capacit y . A p olynomial of degree 1 gives us the linear regression mo del with whic h we are already familiar, with the prediction ˆ y = b + w x. (5.15) By introducing x 2 as another feature provided to the linear regression mo del, we can learn a mo del that is quadratic as a function of x : ˆ y = b + w 1 x + w 2 x 2 . (5.16) Though this mo del implements a quadratic function of its input , the output is still a linear function of the p ar ameters , so we can still use the normal equations to train the mo del in closed form. W e can con tin ue to add more p o w ers of x as additional features, for example, to obtain a p olynomial of degree 9: ˆ y = b + 9  i =1 w i x i . (5.17) Mac hine learning algorithms will generally p erform b est when their capacit y is appropriate for the true complexit y of the task they need to p erform and the amoun t of training data they are pro vided with. Mo dels with insuﬃcien t capacit y are unable to solv e complex tasks. Mo dels with high capacit y can solve complex tasks, but when their capacit y is higher than needed to solve the presen t task, they ma y o v erﬁt. Figure 5.2 shows this principle in action. W e compare a linear, quadratic and degree-9 predictor attempting to ﬁt a problem where the true underlying 110

HTML page 10
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS             Figure 5.2: W e ﬁt three mo dels to this example training set. The training data was generated syn thetically , by randomly sampling x v alues and choosing y deterministically b y ev aluating a quadratic function. (L eft) A linear function ﬁt to the data suﬀers from underﬁtting—it cannot capture the curv ature that is present in the data. (Center) A quadratic function ﬁt to the data generalizes well to unseen points. It do es not suﬀer from a signiﬁcant amount of ov erﬁtting or underﬁtting. (R ight) A polynomial of degree 9 ﬁt to the data suﬀers from o v erﬁtting. Here we used the Moore-Penrose pseudoin v erse to solv e the underdetermined normal equations. The solution passes through all the training p oin ts exactly , but we hav e not b een lucky enough for it to extract the correct structure. It now has a deep v alley betw een tw o training p oints that do es not app ear in the true underlying function. It also increases sharply on the left side of the data, while the true function decreases in this area. function is quadratic. The linear function is unable to capture the curv ature in the true underlying problem, so it underﬁts. The degree-9 predictor is capable of represen ting the correct function, but it is also capable of represen ting inﬁnitely man y other functions that pass exactly through the training p oin ts, b ecause we ha v e more parameters than training examples. W e ha v e little chance of c ho osing a solution that generalizes w ell when so many wildly diﬀeren t solutions exist. In this example, the quadratic mo del is p erfectly matched to the true structure of the task, so it generalizes well to new data. So far we ha v e describ ed only one w a y of changing a mo del’s capacity: b y c hanging the num ber of input features it has, and simultaneously adding new parameters asso ciated with those features. There are in fact many wa ys to change a mo del’s capacity . Capacity is not determined only b y the choice of mo del. The mo del sp eciﬁes which family of functions the learning algorithm can choose from when v arying the parameters in order to reduce a training ob jective. This is called the represen tational capacity of the mo del. In many cases, ﬁnding the b est 111

HTML page 11
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS function within this family is a diﬃcult optimization problem. In practice, the learning algorithm do es not actually ﬁnd the b est function, but merely one that signiﬁcan tly reduces the training error. These additional limitations, suc h as the imp erfection of the optimization algorithm, mean that the learning algorithm’s eﬀectiv e capacity ma y b e less than the representational capacit y of the mo del family . Our mo dern ideas ab out improving the generalization of machine learning mo dels are reﬁnemen ts of though t dating bac k to philosophers at least as early as Ptolem y . Many early scholars inv oke a principle of parsimon y that is now most widely known as Occam’s razor (c. 1287–1347). This principle states that among comp eting hypotheses that explain kno wn observ ations equally w ell, we should c ho ose the “simplest” one. This idea was formalized and made more precise in the tw en tieth century b y the founders of statistical learning theory ( V apnik and Cherv onenkis , 1971 ; V apnik , 1982 ; Blumer et al. , 1989 ; V apnik , 1995 ). Statistical learning theory provides v arious means of quantifying mo del capacit y . Among these, the most w ell known is the V apnik-Chervonenkis dimension , or V C dimension. The VC dimension measures the capacity of a binary classiﬁer. The V C dimension is deﬁned as b eing the largest p ossible v alue of m for which there exists a training set of m diﬀeren t x p oin ts that the classiﬁer can lab el arbitrarily . Quan tifying the capacity of the mo del enables statistical learning theory to mak e quan titativ e predictions. The most imp ortant results in statistical learning theory sho w that the discrepancy b etw een training error and generalization error is b ounded from ab ov e by a quantit y that grows as the mo del capacit y gro ws but shrinks as the num b er of training examples increases ( V apnik and Chervonenkis , 1971 ; V apnik , 1982 ; Blumer et al. , 1989 ; V apnik , 1995 ). These b ounds pro vide in tellectual justiﬁcation that machine learning algorithms can work, but they are rarely used in practice when working with deep learning algorithms. This is in part b ecause the b ounds are often quite lo ose and in part b ecause it can b e quite diﬃcult to determine the capacity of deep learning algorithms. The problem of determining the capacity of a deep learning mo del is esp ecially diﬃcult b ecause the eﬀective capacity is limited by the capabilities of the optimization algorithm, and we ha v e little theoretical understanding of the general nonconv ex optimization problems inv olv ed in deep learning. W e m ust remem b er that while simpler functions are more likely to generalize (to hav e a small gap b etw een training and test error), we m ust still c ho ose a suﬃcien tly complex hypothesis to achiev e low training error. Typically , training error decreases until it asymptotes to the minimum p ossible error v alue as mo del capacit y increases (assuming the error measure has a minim um v alue). T ypically , 112

HTML page 12
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 0 Optimal Capacity Capacity Error Underﬁtting zone Overﬁtting zone Generalization gap T raining error Generalization error Figure 5.3: Typical relationship b etw een capacit y and error. T raining and test error b eha v e diﬀeren tly . At the left end of the graph, training error and generalization error are b oth high. This is the underﬁtting regime . As w e increase capacit y , training error decreases, but the gap betw een training and generalization error increases. Even tually , the size of this gap outw eighs the decrease in training error, and we en ter the o v erﬁtting regime , where capacit y is to o large, ab ov e the optimal capacit y . generalization error has a U-shap ed curv e as a function of mo del capacit y . This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.3 . T o reac h the most extreme case of arbitrarily high capacit y , w e in tro duce the concept of nonparametric mo dels . So far, we hav e seen only parametric mo dels, such as linear regression. Parametric mo dels learn a function describ ed b y a parameter v ector whose size is ﬁnite and ﬁxed b efore any data is observed. Nonparametric mo dels hav e no such limitation. Sometimes, nonparametric mo dels are just theoretical abstractions (such as an algorithm that searches ov er all p ossible probability distributions) that cannot b e implemen ted in practice. Ho w ev er, we can also design practical nonparametric mo dels by making their complexit y a function of the training set size. One example of such an algorithm is nearest neighbor regression . Unlike linear regression, whic h has a ﬁxed-length vector of w eigh ts, the nearest neighbor regression mo del simply stores the X and y from the training set. When asked to classify a test p oin t x , the mo del lo oks up the nearest entry in the training set and returns the asso ciated regression target. In other words, ˆ y = y i where i = arg min || X i, : − x || 2 2 . The algorithm can also b e generalized to distance metrics other than the L 2 norm, suc h as learned distance metrics ( Goldb erger et al. , 2005 ). If the algorithm is allo w ed to break ties b y a v eraging the y i v alues for all X i, : that are tied for nearest, then this algorithm is able to ac hiev e the minimum p ossible training error (which 113

HTML page 13
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS migh t b e greater than zero, if tw o identical inputs are asso ciated with diﬀerent outputs) on any regression dataset. Finally , we can also create a nonparametric learning algorithm b y wrapping a parametric learning algorithm inside another algorithm that increases the num ber of parameters as needed. F or example, we could imagine an outer lo op of learning that c hanges the degree of the p olynomial learned b y linear regression on top of a p olynomial expansion of the input. The ideal model is an oracle that simply knows the true probability distribution that generates the data. Ev en such a mo del will still incur some error on man y problems, b ecause there ma y still b e some noise in the distribution. In the case of sup ervised learning, the mapping from x to y ma y b e inheren tly sto c hastic, or y ma y b e a deterministic function that in v olv es other v ariables b esides those included in x . The error incurred b y an oracle making predictions from the true distribution p ( x , y ) is called the Bay es error . T raining and generalization error v ary as the size of the training set v aries. Exp ected generalization error can never increase as the num ber of training examples increases. F or nonparametric mo dels, more data yield b etter generalization until the b est p ossible error is ac hiev ed. An y ﬁxed parametric mo del with less than optimal capacity will asymptote to an error v alue that exceeds the Ba y es error. See ﬁgure 5.4 for an illustration. Note that it is p ossible for the mo del to hav e optimal capacity and yet still hav e a large gap b etw een training and generalization errors. In this situation, we may b e able to reduce this gap by gathering more training examples. 5.2.1 The No F ree Lunc h Theorem Learning theory claims that a mac hine learning algorithm can generalize well from a ﬁnite training set of examples. This seems to contradict some basic principles of logic. Inductiv e reasoning, or inferring general rules from a limited set of examples, is not logically v alid. T o logically infer a rule describing every mem b er of a set, one must hav e information ab out ev ery mem b er of that set. In part, machine learning av oids this problem by oﬀering only probabilistic rules, rather than the entirely certain rules used in purely logical reasoning. Machine learning promises to ﬁnd rules that are pr ob ably correct ab out most mem b ers of the set they concern. Unfortunately , ev en this do es not resolv e the en tire problem. The no free lunc h theorem for machine learning ( W olpert , 1996 ) states that, a v eraged ov er all p ossible data-generating distributions, every classiﬁcation algorithm has the 114

HTML page 14
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS                                               Figure 5.4: The eﬀect of the training dataset size on the train and test error, as well as on the optimal model capacity . W e constructed a synthetic regression problem based on adding a moderate amount of noise to a degree-5 p olynomial, generated a single test set, and then generated several diﬀerent sizes of training set. F or each size, we generated 40 diﬀeren t training sets in order to plot error bars sho wing 95 percent conﬁdence in terv als. (T op) The MSE on the training and test set for tw o diﬀeren t models: a quadratic model, and a mo del with degree c hosen to minimize the test error. Both are ﬁt in closed form. F or the quadratic model, the training error increases as the size of the training set increases. This is because larger datasets are harder to ﬁt. Sim ultaneously , the test error decreases, b ecause few er incorrect hypotheses are consistent with the training data. The quadratic mo del do es not hav e enough capacity to solv e the task, so its test error asymptotes to a high v alue. The test error at optimal capacity asymptotes to the Bay es error. The training error can fall b elow the Bay es error, due to the ability of the training algorithm to memorize sp eciﬁc instances of the training set. As the training size increases to inﬁnity , the training error of an y ﬁxed-capacit y mo del (here, the quadratic mo del) m ust rise to at least the Bay es error. (Bottom) As the training set size increases, the optimal capacity (sho wn here as the degree of the optimal p olynomial regressor) increases. The optimal capacit y plateaus after reac hing suﬃcien t complexity to solve the task. 115

HTML page 15
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS same error rate when classifying previously unobserv ed p oin ts. In other w ords, in some sense, no machine learning algorithm is universally any b etter than any other. The most sophisticated algorithm w e can conceiv e of has the same av erage p erformance (ov er all p ossible tasks) as merely predicting that every p oin t b elongs to the same class. F ortunately , these results hold only when we av erage ov er al l p ossible data- generating distributions. If w e make assumptions ab out the kinds of probability distributions w e encounter in real-world applications, then we can design learning algorithms that p erform well on these distributions. This means that the goal of mac hine learning research is not to seek a univ ersal learning algorithm or the absolute b est learning algorithm. Instead, our goal is to understand what kinds of distributions are relev ant to the “real world” that an AI agen t exp eriences, and what kinds of mac hine learning algorithms p erform well on data drawn from the kinds of data-generating distributions we care ab out. 5.2.2 Regularization The no free lunch theorem implies that we must design our machine learning algorithms to p erform well on a sp eciﬁc task. W e do so b y building a set of preferences into the learning algorithm. When these preferences are aligned with the learning problems that we ask the algorithm to solve, it p erforms b etter. So far, the only metho d of mo difying a learning algorithm that we ha v e discussed concretely is to increase or decrease the mo del’s represen tational capacity by adding or removing functions from the hypothesis space of solutions the learning algorithm is able to c ho ose from. W e ga v e the sp eciﬁc example of increasing or decreasing the degree of a p olynomial for a regression problem. The view we hav e describ ed so far is ov ersimpliﬁed. The b ehavior of our algorithm is strongly aﬀected not just by ho w large w e mak e the set of functions allow ed in its hypothesis space, but by the sp eciﬁc identit y of those functions. The learning algorithm w e hav e studied so far, linear regression, has a h yp othesis space consisting of the set of linear functions of its input. These linear functions can b e useful for problems where the relationship b etw een inputs and outputs truly is close to linear. They are less useful for problems that b ehav e in a v ery nonlinear fashion. F or example, linear regression would not p erform well if w e tried to use it to predict sin ( x ) from x . W e can thus con trol the p erformance of our algorithms b y choosing what kind of functions w e allo w them to draw solutions from, as well as by con trolling the amoun t of these functions. W e can also give a learning algorithm a preference for one solution o v er another 116

HTML page 16
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS in its hypothesis space. This means that b oth functions are eligible, but one is preferred. The unpreferred solution will b e chosen only if it ﬁts the training data signiﬁcan tly b etter than the preferred solution. F or example, we can mo dify the training criterion for linear regression to include w eigh t deca y . T o p erform linear regression with weigh t deca y , w e minimize a sum J ( w ) comprising b oth the mean squared error on the training and a criterion that expresses a preference for the w eigh ts to hav e smaller squared L 2 norm. Sp eciﬁcally , J ( w ) = MSE train + λ w  w , (5.18) where λ is a v alue chosen ahead of time that controls the strength of our preference for smaller weigh ts. When λ = 0 , we imp ose no preference, and larger λ forces the w eigh ts to b ecome smaller. Minimizing J ( w ) results in a c hoice of w eigh ts that mak e a tradeoﬀ b et w een ﬁtting the training data and b eing small. This gives us solutions that ha v e a smaller slop e, or that put w eigh t on fewer of the features. As an example of how we can control a mo del’s tendency to o v erﬁt or underﬁt via weigh t decay , we can train a high-degree p olynomial regression mo del with diﬀeren t v alues of λ . See ﬁgure 5.5 for the results. More generally , we can regularize a mo del that learns a function f ( x ; θ ) by adding a p enalty called a regularizer to the cost function. In the case of weigh t deca y , the regularizer is Ω( w ) = w  w . In chapter 7 , we will see that many other regularizers are p ossible. Expressing preferences for one function ov er another is a more general wa y of controlling a mo del’s capacity than including or excluding members from the h yp othesis space. W e can think of excluding a function from a hypothesis space as expressing an inﬁnitely strong preference against that function. In our weigh t decay example, we expressed our preference for linear functions deﬁned with smaller weigh ts explicitly , via an extra term in the criterion we minimize. There are man y other wa ys of expressing preferences for diﬀerent solutions, b oth implicitly and explicitly . T ogether, these diﬀeren t approaches are known as regularization . R e gularization is any mo diﬁc ation we make to a le arning algorithm that is intende d to r e duc e its gener alization err or but not its tr aining err or. Regularization is one of the central concerns of the ﬁeld of machine learning, riv aled in its imp ortance only b y optimization. The no free lunch theorem has made it clear that there is no b est machine learning algorithm, and, in particular, no b est form of regularization. Instead w e must choose a form of regularization that is well suited to the particular task w e wan t to solve. The philosophy of deep learning in general and this b o ok in particular is that a wide range of tasks (such as all the in tellectual tasks that 117

HTML page 17
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS p eople can do) ma y all b e solv ed eﬀectively using very general-purp ose forms of regularization. 5.3 Hyp erparameters and V alidation Sets Most machine learning algorithms hav e hyperparameters, settings that we can use to control the algorithm’s b ehavior. The v alues of h yp erparameters are not adapted by the learning algorithm itself (though we can design a nested learning pro cedure in which one learning algorithm learns the b est hyperparameters for another learning algorithm). The p olynomial regression example in ﬁgure 5.2 has a single hyperparameter: the degree of the p olynomial, which acts as a capacit y h yp erparameter. The λ v alue used to con trol the strength of w eigh t decay is another example of a h yp erparameter.                             Figure 5.5: W e ﬁt a high-degree p olynomial regression mo del to our example training set from ﬁgure 5.2 . The true function is quadratic, but here we use only models with degree 9. W e v ary the amoun t of weigh t decay to prev en t these high-degree models from ov erﬁtting. (L eft) With v ery large λ , w e can force the mo del to learn a function with no slop e at all. This underﬁts b ecause it can only represent a constant function. (Center) With a medium v alue of λ , the learning algorithm recov ers a curve with the right general shap e. Ev en though the mo del is capable of represen ting functions with m uc h more complicated shap es, weigh t decay has encouraged it to use a simpler function describ ed b y smaller co eﬃcien ts. (Right) With weigh t decay approaching zero (i.e., using the Mo ore-Penrose pseudoin verse to solv e the underdetermined problem with minimal regularization), the degree-9 polynomial ov erﬁts signiﬁcan tly , as we saw in ﬁgure 5.2 . 118

HTML page 18
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Sometimes a setting is chosen to b e a hyperparameter that the learning algo- rithm do es not learn b ecause the setting is diﬃcult to optimize. More frequently , the setting must b e a hyperparameter b ecause it is not appropriate to learn that h yp erparameter on the training set. This applies to all hyperparameters that con trol mo del capacity . If learned on the training set, such h yp erparameters w ould alw a ys c ho ose the maximum p ossible mo del capacity , resulting in ov erﬁtting ( refer to ﬁgure 5.3 ). F or example, w e can alw a ys ﬁt the training set b etter with a higher-degree p olynomial and a weigh t decay setting of λ = 0 than w e could with a lo w er-degree p olynomial and a p ositive w eigh t deca y setting. T o solve this problem, we need a v alidation set of examples that the training algorithm do es not observe. Earlier w e discussed ho w a held-out test set, comp osed of examples coming from the same distribution as the training set, can b e used to estimate the generalization error of a learner, after the learning pro cess has completed. It is imp ortan t that the test examples are not used in an y w a y to mak e c hoices ab out the mo del, including its h yp erparameters. F or this reason, no example from the test set can b e used in the v alidation set. Therefore, w e alwa ys construct the v alidation set from the tr aining data. Speciﬁcally , w e split the training data in to tw o disjoint subsets. One of these subsets is used to learn the parameters. The other subset is our v alidation set, used to estimate the generalization error during or after training, allo wing for the hyperparameters to b e up dated accordingly . The subset of data used to learn the parameters is still t ypically called the training set, ev en though this may b e confused with the larger p o ol of data used for the entire training pro cess. The subset of data used to guide the selection of h yp erparameters is called the v alidation set. Typically , one uses ab out 80 p ercen t of the training data for training and 20 p ercen t for v alidation. Since the v alidation set is used to “train” the hyperparameters, the v alidation set error will underestimate the generalization error, though t ypically b y a smaller amount than the training error do es. After all hyperparameter optimization is complete, the generalization error ma y b e estimated using the test set. In practice, when the same test set has b een used rep eatedly to ev aluate p erformance of diﬀeren t algorithms o v er man y y ears, and esp ecially if we consider all the attempts from the scientiﬁc communit y at b eating the rep orted state-of- the-art p erformance on that test set, we end up having optimistic ev aluations with the test set as well. Benchmarks can thus b ecome stale and then do not reﬂect the true ﬁeld p erformance of a trained system. Thankfully , the communit y tends to mo v e on to new (and usually more am bitious and larger) b enchmark datasets. 119

HTML page 19
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 5.3.1 Cross-V alidation Dividing the dataset into a ﬁxed training set and a ﬁxed test set can be problematic if it results in the test set b eing small. A small test set implies statistical uncertaint y around the estimated av erage test error, making it diﬃcult to claim that algorithm A works b etter than algorithm B on the given task. When the dataset has hundreds of thousands of examples or more, this is not a serious issue. When the dataset is to o small, alternativ e pro cedures enable one to use all the examples in the estimation of the mean test error, at the price of increased computational cost. These pro cedures are based on the idea of rep eating the training and testing computation on diﬀeren t randomly chosen subsets or splits of the original dataset. The most common of these is the k -fold cross-v alidation pro cedure, shown in algorithm 5.1 , in which a partition of the dataset is formed b y splitting it into k nono v erlapping subsets. The test error may then b e estimated b y taking the a v erage test error across k trials. On trial i , the i -th subset of the data is used as the test set, and the rest of the data is used as the training set. One problem is that no unbiased estimators of the v ariance of such av erage error estimators exist ( Bengio and Grandv alet , 2004 ), but approximations are t ypically used. 5.4 Estimators, Bias and V ariance The ﬁeld of statistics gives us man y to ols to achiev e the machine learning goal of solving a task not only on the training set but also to generalize. F oundational concepts such as parameter estimation, bias and v ariance are useful to formally c haracterize notions of generalization, underﬁtting and o v erﬁtting. 5.4.1 P oin t Estimation P oin t estimation is the attempt to provide the single “b est” prediction of some quan tit y of interest. In general the quantit y of interest can b e a single parameter or a v ector of parameters in some parametric mo del, such as the weigh ts in our linear regression example in section 5.1.4 , but it can also b e a whole function. T o distinguish estimates of parameters from their true v alue, our conv en tion will b e to denote a p oint estimate of a parameter θ by ˆ θ . Let { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } b e a set of m indep enden t and iden tically distributed 120

HTML page 1a
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Algorithm 5.1 The k -fold cross-v alidation algorithm. It can b e used to estimate generalization error of a learning algorithm A when the given dataset D is to o small for a simple train/test or train/v alid split to yield accurate estimation of generalization error, b ecause the mean of a loss L on a small test set ma y hav e to o high a v ariance. The dataset D con tains as elements the abstract examples z ( i ) (for the i -th example), which could stand for an (input,target) pair z ( i ) = ( x ( i ) , y ( i ) ) in the case of sup ervised learning, or for just an input z ( i ) = x ( i ) in the case of unsup ervised learning. The algorithm returns the vector of errors e for each example in D , whose mean is the estimated generalization error. The errors on individual examples can b e used to compute a conﬁdence interv al around the mean (equation 5.47 ). Though these conﬁdence in terv als are not well justiﬁed after the use of cross-v alidation, it is still common practice to use them to declare that algorithm A is b etter than algorithm B only if the conﬁdence interv al of the error of algorithm A lies b elow and do es not in tersect the conﬁdence interv al of algorithm B . Deﬁne KFoldXV ( D , A, L, k ): Require: D , the given dataset, with elemen ts z ( i ) Require: A , the learning algorithm, seen as a function that takes a dataset as input and outputs a learned function Require: L , the loss function, seen as a function from a learned function f and an example z ( i ) ∈ D to a scalar ∈ R Require: k , the num ber of folds Split D into k mutually exclusive subsets D i , whose union is D for i from 1 to k do f i = A ( D \ D i ) for z ( j ) in D i do e j = L ( f i , z ( j ) ) end f or end fo r Return e (i.i.d.) data p oints. A p oint estimator or statistic is any function of the data: ˆ θ m = g ( x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) ) . (5.19) The deﬁnition do es not require that g return a v alue that is close to the true θ or even that the range of g b e the same as the set of allow able v alues of θ . This deﬁnition of a p oin t estimator is very general and would enable the designer of an estimator great ﬂexibilit y . While almost an y function th us qualiﬁes as an estimator, 121

HTML page 1b
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS a go o d estimator is a function whose output is close to the true underlying θ that generated the training data. F or now, w e tak e the frequen tist p ersp ectiv e on statistics. That is, we assume that the true parameter v alue θ is ﬁxed but unkno wn, while the p oin t estimate ˆ θ is a function of the data. Since the data is drawn from a random pro cess, an y function of the data is random. Therefore ˆ θ is a random v ariable. P oin t estimation can also refer to the estimation of the relationship b etw een input and target v ariables. W e refer to these types of p oint estimates as function estimators. F unction Estimation Sometimes w e are interested in p erforming function estimation (or function approximation). Here, we are trying to predict a v ariable y giv en an input vector x . W e assume that there is a function f ( x ) that describ es the approximate relationship b etw een y and x . F or example, we may assume that y = f ( x ) +  , where  stands for the part of y that is not predictable from x . In function estimation, w e are interested in appro ximating f with a mo del or estimate ˆ f . F unction estimation is really just the same as estimating a parameter θ ; the function estimator ˆ f is simply a p oin t estimator in function space. The linear regression example (discussed in section 5.1.4 ) and the p olynomial regression example (discussed in section 5.2 ) b oth illustrate scenarios that may b e interpreted as either estimating a parameter w or estimating a function ˆ f mapping from x to y . W e no w review the most commonly studied prop erties of p oint estimators and discuss what they tell us ab out these estimators. 5.4.2 Bias The bias of an estimator is deﬁned as bias( ˆ θ m ) = E ( ˆ θ m ) − θ , (5.20) where the exp ectation is o v er the data (seen as samples from a random v ariable) and θ is the true underlying v alue of θ used to deﬁne the data-generating distri- bution. An estimator ˆ θ m is said to b e un biased if bias ( ˆ θ m ) = 0 , whic h implies that E ( ˆ θ m ) = θ . An estimator ˆ θ m is said to b e asymptotically unbiased if lim m →∞ bias( ˆ θ m ) = 0 , which implies that lim m →∞ E ( ˆ θ m ) = θ . Example: Bernoulli Distribution Consider a set of samples { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } that are indep enden tly and identically distributed according to a Bernoulli distri- 122

HTML page 1c
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS bution with mean θ : P ( x ( i ) ; θ ) = θ x ( i ) (1 − θ ) (1 − x ( i ) ) . (5.21) A common estimator for the θ parameter of this distribution is the mean of the training samples: ˆ θ m = 1 m m  i =1 x ( i ) . (5.22) T o determine whether this estimator is biased, we can substitute equation 5.22 in to equation 5.20 : bias( ˆ θ m ) = E [ ˆ θ m ] − θ (5.23) = E  1 m m  i =1 x ( i )  − θ (5.24) = 1 m m  i =1 E  x ( i )  − θ (5.25) = 1 m m  i =1 1  x ( i ) =0  x ( i ) θ x ( i ) (1 − θ ) (1 − x ( i ) )  − θ (5.26) = 1 m m  i =1 ( θ ) − θ (5.27) = θ − θ = 0 (5.28) Since bias( ˆ θ ) = 0 , we say that our estimator ˆ θ is unbiased. Example: Gaussian Distribution Estimator of the Mean No w, consider a set of samples { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } that are indep enden tly and iden tically distributed according to a Gaussian distribution p ( x ( i ) ) = N ( x ( i ) ; µ, σ 2 ) , where i ∈ { 1 , . . . , m } . Recall that the Gaussian probability density function is given by p ( x ( i ) ; µ, σ 2 ) = 1 √ 2 π σ 2 exp  − 1 2 ( x ( i ) − µ ) 2 σ 2  . (5.29) A common estimator of the Gaussian mean parameter is known as the sample mean : ˆ µ m = 1 m m  i =1 x ( i ) (5.30) 123

HTML page 1d
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS T o determine the bias of the sample mean, we are again interested in calculating its exp ectation: bias( ˆ µ m ) = E [ ˆ µ m ] − µ (5.31) = E  1 m m  i =1 x ( i )  − µ (5.32) =  1 m m  i =1 E  x ( i )   − µ (5.33) =  1 m m  i =1 µ  − µ (5.34) = µ − µ = 0 (5.35) Th us we ﬁnd that the sample mean is an un biased estimator of Gaussian mean parameter. Example: Estimators of the V ariance of a Gaussian Distribution F or this example, w e compare tw o diﬀerent estimators of the v ariance parameter σ 2 of a Gaussian distribution. W e are in terested in knowin g if either estimator is biased. The ﬁrst estimator of σ 2 w e consider is known as the sample v ariance ˆ σ 2 m = 1 m m  i =1  x ( i ) − ˆ µ m  2 , (5.36) where ˆ µ m is the sample mean. More formally , we are in terested in computing bias( ˆ σ 2 m ) = E [ ˆ σ 2 m ] − σ 2 . (5.37) W e b egin b y ev aluating the term E [ ˆ σ 2 m ] : E [ ˆ σ 2 m ] = E  1 m m  i =1  x ( i ) − ˆ µ m  2  (5.38) = m − 1 m σ 2 (5.39) Returning to equation 5.37 , w e conclude that the bias of ˆ σ 2 m is − σ 2 /m . Therefore, the sample v ariance is a biased estimator. 124

HTML page 1e
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS The unbiased sample v ariance estimator ˜ σ 2 m = 1 m − 1 m  i =1  x ( i ) − ˆ µ m  2 (5.40) pro vides an alternativ e approac h. As the name suggests this estimator is unbiased. That is, we ﬁnd that E [ ˜ σ 2 m ] = σ 2 : E [ ˜ σ 2 m ] = E  1 m − 1 m  i =1  x ( i ) − ˆ µ m  2  (5.41) = m m − 1 E [ ˆ σ 2 m ] (5.42) = m m − 1  m − 1 m σ 2  (5.43) = σ 2 . (5.44) W e ha v e tw o estimators: one is biased, and the other is not. While un biased estimators are clearly desirable, they are not alwa ys the “b est” estimators. As we will see we often use biased estimators that p ossess other imp ortant prop erties. 5.4.3 V ariance and Standard Error Another prop erty of the estimator that we might wan t to consider is ho w muc h w e exp ect it to v ary as a function of the data sample. Just as we computed the exp ectation of the estimator to determine its bias, we can compute its v ariance. The v ariance of an estimator is simply the v ariance V ar( ˆ θ ) (5.45) where the random v ariable is the training set. Alternately , the square ro ot of the v ariance is called the standard error , denoted SE( ˆ θ ) . The v ariance, or the standard error, of an estimator pro vides a measure of ho w w e w ould exp ect the estimate we compute from data to v ary as we indep endently resample the dataset from the underlying data-generating pro cess. Just as we migh t lik e an estimator to exhibit low bias, we would also like it to hav e relatively lo w v ariance. When w e compute an y statistic using a ﬁnite num b er of samples, our estimate of the true underlying parameter is uncertain, in the sense that we could hav e obtained other samples from the same distribution and their statistics w ould ha v e 125

HTML page 1f
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS b een diﬀerent. The exp ected degree of v ariation in any estimator is a source of error that we wan t to quantif y . The standard error of the mean is giv en b y SE( ˆ µ m ) =     V ar  1 m m  i =1 x ( i )  = σ √ m , (5.46) where σ 2 is the true v ariance of the samples x i . The standard error is often estimated b y using an estimate of σ . Unfortunately , neither the square ro ot of the sample v ariance nor the square ro ot of the unbiased estimator of the v ariance pro vide an unbiased estimate of the standard deviation. Both approac hes tend to underestimate the true standard deviation but are still used in practice. The square ro ot of the un biased estimator of the v ariance is less of an underestimate. F or large m , the approximation is quite reasonable. The standard error of the mean is v ery useful in machine learning exp eriments. W e often estimate the generalization error by computing the sample mean of the error on the test set. The n um b er of examples in the test set determines the accuracy of this estimate. T aking adv antage of the central limit theorem, which tells us that the mean will b e approximately distributed with a normal distribution, w e can use the standard error to compute the probabilit y that the true expectation falls in any chosen in terv al. F or example, the 95 p ercen t conﬁdence interv al centered on the mean ˆ µ m is ( ˆ µ m − 1 . 96SE( ˆ µ m ) , ˆ µ m + 1 . 96SE( ˆ µ m )) , (5.47) under the normal distribution with mean ˆ µ m and v ariance SE ( ˆ µ m ) 2 . In machine learning exp eriments, it is common to sa y that algorithm A is b etter than algorithm B if the upp er b ound of the 95 p ercent conﬁdence in terv al for the error of algorithm A is less than the lo w er b ound of the 95 p ercen t conﬁdence interv al for the error of algorithm B . Example: Bernoulli Distribution W e once again consider a set of samples { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } dra wn indep enden tly and identically from a Bernoulli distribution (recall P ( x ( i ) ; θ ) = θ x ( i ) (1 − θ ) (1 − x ( i ) ) ). This time we are interested in computing the v ariance of the estimator ˆ θ m = 1 m  m i =1 x ( i ) . V ar  ˆ θ m  = V ar  1 m m  i =1 x ( i )  (5.48) 126

HTML page 20
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS = 1 m 2 m  i =1 V ar  x ( i )  (5.49) = 1 m 2 m  i =1 θ (1 − θ ) (5.50) = 1 m 2 mθ (1 − θ ) (5.51) = 1 m θ (1 − θ ) (5.52) The v ariance of the estimator decreases as a function of m , the num b er of examples in the dataset. This is a common prop erty of p opular estimators that w e will return to when we discuss consistency (see section 5.4.5 ). 5.4.4 T rading oﬀ Bias and V ariance to Minimize Mean Squared Error Bias and v ariance measure t w o diﬀerent sources of error in an estimator. Bias measures the exp ected deviation from the true v alue of the function or parameter. V ariance on the other hand, pro vides a measure of the deviation from the exp ected estimator v alue that any particular sampling of the data is likely to cause. What happ ens when we are given a c hoice b et w een tw o estimators, one with more bias and one with more v ariance? How do we c ho ose b etw een them? F or example, imagine that we are interested in approximating the function shown in ﬁgure 5.2 and w e are only oﬀered the c hoice b et w een a mo del with large bias and one that suﬀers from large v ariance. How do w e c ho ose b et w een them? The most common wa y to negotiate this trade-oﬀ is to use cross-v alidation. Empirically , cross-v alidation is highly successful on man y real-w orld tasks. Alter- nativ ely , we can also compare the mean squared error (MSE) of the estimates: MSE = E [( ˆ θ m − θ ) 2 ] (5.53) = Bias( ˆ θ m ) 2 + V ar( ˆ θ m ) (5.54) The MSE measures the ov erall exp ected deviation—in a squared error sense— b et w een the estimator and the true v alue of the parameter θ . As is clear from equation 5.54 , ev aluating the MSE incorp orates b oth the bias and the v ariance. Desirable estimators are those with small MSE and these are estimators that manage to keep b oth their bias and v ariance somewhat in c hec k. The relationship b etw een bias and v ariance is tigh tly linked to the machine learning concepts of capacit y , underﬁtting and ov erﬁtting. When generalization 127

HTML page 21
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Capacity Bias Generalization error V ariance Optimal capacity Overﬁtting zone Underﬁtting zone Figure 5.6: As capacit y increases ( x -axis), bias (dotted) tends to decrease and v ariance (dashed) tends to increase, yielding another U-shap ed curv e for generalization error (bold curv e). If w e v ary capacity along one axis, there is an optimal capacit y , with underﬁtting when the capacity is b elow this optimum and o v erﬁtting when it is ab ov e. This relationship is similar to the relationship b etw een capacity , underﬁtting, and ov erﬁtting, discussed in section 5.2 and ﬁgure 5.3 . error is measured by the MSE (where bias and v ariance are meaningful comp onen ts of generalization error), increasing capacit y tends to increase v ariance and decrease bias. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.6 , where we see again the U-shap ed curve of generalization error as a function of capacit y . 5.4.5 Consistency So far we hav e discussed the prop erties of v arious estimators for a training set of ﬁxed size. Usually , we are also concerned with the b ehavior of an estimator as the amoun t of training data grows. In particular, w e usually wish that, as the num ber of data p oints m in our dataset increases, our p oint estimates con v erge to the true v alue of the corresp onding parameters. More formally , we would like that plim m →∞ ˆ θ m = θ . (5.55) The sym b ol plim indicates con v ergence in probabilit y , meaning that for any  > 0 , P ( | ˆ θ m − θ | >  ) → 0 as m → ∞ . The condition describ ed by equation 5.55 is kno wn as consistency . It is sometimes referred to as w eak consistency , with strong consistency referring to the almost sure con v ergence of ˆ θ to θ . Almost 128

HTML page 22
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS sure conv ergence of a sequence of random v ariables x (1) , x (2) , . . . to a v alue x o ccurs when p (lim m →∞ x ( m ) = x ) = 1 . Consistency ensures that the bias induced by the estimator diminishes as the n um b er of data examples gro ws. Ho w ev er, the rev erse is not true—asymptotic un biasedness do es not imply consistency . F or example, consider estimating the mean parameter µ of a normal distribution N ( x ; µ, σ 2 ) , with a dataset consisting of m samples: { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } . W e could use the ﬁrst sample x (1) of the dataset as an unbiased estimator: ˆ θ = x (1) . In that case, E ( ˆ θ m ) = θ , so the estimator is un biased no matter how many data p oin ts are seen. This, of course, implies that the estimate is asymptotically unbiased. Ho w ev er, this is not a consisten t estimator as it is not the case that ˆ θ m → θ as m → ∞ . 5.5 Maxim um Likelihoo d Estimation W e ha v e seen some deﬁnitions of common estimators and analyzed their prop erties. But where did these estimators come from? Rather than guessing that some function might make a go o d estimator and then analyzing its bias and v ariance, w e would like to ha v e some principle from whic h w e can derive sp eciﬁc functions that are go o d estimators for diﬀerent mo dels. The most common such principle is the maxim um likelihoo d principle. Consider a set of m examples X = { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } dra wn indep enden tly from the true but unknown data-generating distribution p data ( x ) . Let p model ( x ; θ ) b e a parametric family of probability distributions ov er the same space indexed b y θ . In other w ords, p model ( x ; θ ) maps any conﬁguration x to a real num ber estimating the true probabilit y p data ( x ) . The maximum likelihoo d estimator for θ is then deﬁned as θ ML = arg max θ p model ( X ; θ ) , (5.56) = arg max θ m  i =1 p model ( x ( i ) ; θ ) . (5.57) This pro duct ov er many probabilities can b e incon v enien t for v arious reasons. F or example, it is prone to numerical underﬂow. T o obtain a more conv enien t but equiv alent optimization problem, w e observ e that taking the logarithm of the lik eliho o d do es not c hange its arg max but do es con v enien tly transform a pro duct 129

HTML page 23
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS in to a sum: θ ML = arg max θ m  i =1 log p model ( x ( i ) ; θ ) . (5.58) Because the arg max do es not c hange when we rescale the cost function, we can divide by m to obtain a v ersion of the criterion that is expressed as an exp ectation with resp ect to the empirical distribution ˆ p data deﬁned by the training data: θ ML = arg max θ E x ∼ ˆ p data log p model ( x ; θ ) . (5.59) One w a y to interpret maximum lik eliho o d estimation is to view it as minimizing the dissimilarity b etw een the empirical distribution ˆ p data , deﬁned by the training set and the mo del distribution, with the degree of dissimilarity b et w een the tw o measured by the KL divergence. The KL div ergence is given by D KL ( ˆ p data  p model ) = E x ∼ ˆ p data [log ˆ p data ( x ) − log p model ( x )] . (5.60) The term on the left is a function only of the data-generating pro cess, not the mo del. This means when w e train the mo del to minimize the KL div ergence, w e need only minimize − E x ∼ ˆ p data [log p model ( x )] , (5.61) whic h is of course the same as the maximization in equation 5.59 . Minimizing this KL divergence corresp onds exactly to minimizing the cross- en trop y b etw een the distributions. Man y authors use the term “cross-entrop y” to iden tify sp eciﬁcally the negative log-lik eliho o d of a Bernoulli or softmax distribution, but that is a misnomer. Any loss consisting of a negative log-lik eliho o d is a cross- en trop y b etw een the empirical distribution deﬁned by the training set and the probabilit y distribution deﬁned by mo del. F or example, mean squared error is the cross-en trop y b et w een the empirical distribution and a Gaussian mo del. W e can thus see maximum likelihoo d as an attempt to make the mo del dis- tribution match the empirical distribution ˆ p data . Ideally , w e would like to match the true data-generating distribution p data , but w e ha v e no direct access to this distribution. While the optimal θ is the same regardless of whether we are maximizing the lik eliho o d or minimizing the KL divergence, the v alues of the ob jectiv e functions are diﬀeren t. In softw are, we often phrase b oth as minimizing a cost function. Maxim um likelihoo d th us b ecomes minimization of the negativ e log-likelihoo d (NLL), or equiv alen tly , minimization of the cross-en trop y . The persp ective of maxim um likelihoo d as minimum KL div ergence b ecomes helpful in this case b ecause the KL divergence has a known minimum v alue of zero. The negativ e log-lik eliho o d can actually b ecome negative when x is real-v alued. 130

HTML page 24
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 5.5.1 Conditional Log-Lik eliho o d and Mean Squared Error The maxim um lik eliho o d estimator can readily b e generalized to estimate a condi- tional probabilit y P ( y | x ; θ ) in order to predict y giv en x . This is actually the most common situation b ecause it forms the basis for most sup ervised learning. If X represen ts all our inputs and Y all our observed targets, then the conditional maxim um lik eliho o d estimator is θ ML = arg max θ P ( Y | X ; θ ) . (5.62) If the examples are assumed to b e i.i.d., then this can b e decomp osed in to θ ML = arg max θ m  i =1 log P ( y ( i ) | x ( i ) ; θ ) . (5.63) Example: Linear Regression as Maxim um Lik eliho o d Linear regression, in tro duced in section 5.1.4 , ma y b e justiﬁed as a maxim um likelihoo d pro cedure. Previously , w e motiv ated linear regression as an algorithm that learns to take an input x and pro duce an output v alue ˆ y . The mapping from x to ˆ y is chosen to minimize mean squared error, a criterion that w e in tro duced more or less arbitrarily . W e now revisit linear regression from the p oint of view of maxim um likelihoo d estimation. Instead of pro ducing a single prediction ˆ y , w e no w think of the mo del as pro ducing a conditional distribution p ( y | x ) . W e can imagine that with an inﬁnitely large training set, w e migh t see sev eral training examples with the same input v alue x but diﬀeren t v alues of y . The goal of the learning algorithm is no w to ﬁt the distribution p ( y | x ) to all those diﬀerent y v alues that are all compatible with x . T o derive the same linear regression algorithm we obtained b efore, we deﬁne p ( y | x ) = N ( y ; ˆ y ( x ; w ) , σ 2 ) . The function ˆ y ( x ; w ) gives the prediction of the mean of the Gaussian. In this example, w e assume that the v ariance is ﬁxed to some constant σ 2 c hosen by the user. W e will see that this c hoice of the functional form of p ( y | x ) causes the maxim um lik eliho o d estimation pro cedure to yield the same learning algorithm as we developed b efore. Since the examples are assumed to b e i.i.d., the conditional log-likelihoo d (equation 5.63 ) is given by m  i =1 log p ( y ( i ) | x ( i ) ; θ ) (5.64) = − m log σ − m 2 log(2 π ) − m  i =1   ˆ y ( i ) − y ( i )   2 2 σ 2 , (5.65) 131

HTML page 25
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS where ˆ y ( i ) is the output of the linear regression on the i -th input x ( i ) and m is the n um b er of the training examples. Comparing the log-lik eliho o d with the mean squared error, MSE train = 1 m m  i =1 || ˆ y ( i ) − y ( i ) || 2 , (5.66) w e immediately see that maximizing the log-lik eliho o d with resp ect to w yields the same estimate of the parameters w as do es minimizing the mean squared error. The t w o criteria hav e diﬀerent v alues but the same lo cation of the optimum. This justiﬁes the use of the MSE as a maxim um likelihoo d estimation pro cedure. As w e will see, the maximum likelihoo d estimator has sev eral desirable prop erties. 5.5.2 Prop erties of Maxim um Likelihoo d The main app eal of the maximum likelihoo d estimator is that it can b e shown to b e the b est estimator asymptotically , as the num b er of examples m → ∞ , in terms of its rate of conv ergence as m increases. Under appropriate conditions, the maxim um lik eliho o d estimator has the prop ert y of consistency (see section 5.4.5 ), meaning that as the num ber of training examples approac hes inﬁnity , the maxim um likelihoo d estimate of a parameter con v erges to the true v alue of the parameter. These conditions are as follows: • The true distribution p data m ust lie within the model family p model ( · ; θ ) . Otherwise, no estimator can recov er p data . • The true distribution p data m ust corresp ond to exactly one v alue of θ . Oth- erwise, maxim um lik eliho o d can reco v er the correct p data but will not be able to determine which v alue of θ was used b y the data-generating pro cess. There are other inductive principles b esides the maxim um likelihoo d estimator, man y of which share the prop ert y of b eing consistent estimators. Consisten t estimators can diﬀer, how ever, in their statistical eﬃciency , meaning that one consisten t estimator may obtain low er generalization error for a ﬁxed num b er of samples m , or equiv alen tly , may require few er examples to obtain a ﬁxed level of generalization error. Statistical eﬃciency is typically studied in the parametric case (as in linear regression), where our goal is to estimate the v alue of a parameter (assuming it is p ossible to identify the true parameter), not the v alue of a function. A wa y to measure ho w close we are to the true parameter is by the exp ected mean squared error, computing the squared diﬀerence b et w een the estimated and true parameter 132

HTML page 26
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS v alues, where the exp ectation is ov er m training samples from the data-generating distribution. That parametric mean squared error decreases as m increases, and for m large, the Cramér-Rao low er b ound ( Rao , 1945 ; Cramér , 1946 ) sho ws that no consisten t estimator has a low er MSE than the maxim um lik eliho o d estimator. F or these reasons (consistency and eﬃciency), maximum likelihoo d is often considered the preferred estimator to use for mac hine learning. When the num b er of examples is small enough to yield ov erﬁtting b ehavior, regularization strategies suc h as weigh t decay ma y b e used to obtain a biased version of maxim um lik eliho o d that has less v ariance when training data is limited. 5.6 Ba y esian Statistics So far w e ha v e discussed frequen tist statistics and approac hes based on estimat- ing a single v alue of θ , then making all predictions thereafter based on that one estimate. Another approach is to consider all p ossible v alues of θ when making a prediction. The latter is the domain of Ba y esian statistics . As discussed in section 5.4.1 , the frequen tist p ersp ective is that the true parameter v alue θ is ﬁxed but unkno wn, while the p oint estimate ˆ θ is a random v ariable on account of it b eing a function of the dataset (which is seen as random). The Bay esian p ersp ective on statistics is quite diﬀeren t. The Bay esian uses probabilit y to reﬂect degrees of certaint y in states of knowledge. The dataset is directly observ ed and so is not random. On the other hand, the true parameter θ is unknown or uncertain and thus is represen ted as a random v ariable. Before observing the data, we represent our knowl edge of θ using the prior probabilit y distribution , p ( θ ) (sometimes referred to as simply “the prior”). Generally , the machine learning practitioner selects a prior distribution that is quite broad (i.e., with high entrop y) to reﬂect a high degree of uncertain t y in the v alue of θ b efore observing any data. F or example, one might assume a priori that θ lies in some ﬁnite range or v olume, with a uniform distribution. Man y priors instead reﬂect a preference for “simpler” solutions (such as smaller magnitude co eﬃcien ts, or a function that is closer to b eing constant). No w consider that we ha v e a set of data samples { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } . W e can reco v er the eﬀect of data on our b elief ab out θ b y combining the data lik eliho o d p ( x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) | θ ) with the prior via Bay es’ rule: p ( θ | x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) ) = p ( x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) | θ ) p ( θ ) p ( x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) ) (5.67) 133

HTML page 27
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS In the scenarios where Ba y esian estimation is typically used, the prior b egins as a relativ ely uniform or Gaussian distribution with high en trop y , and the observ ation of the data usually causes the p osterior to lose entrop y and concentrate around a few highly likely v alues of the parameters. Relativ e to maximum likelihoo d estimation, Bay esian estimation oﬀers tw o imp ortan t diﬀerences. First, unlik e the maxim um lik eliho o d approac h that mak es predictions using a p oint estimate of θ , the Ba y esian approach is to make predictions using a full distribution ov er θ . F or example, after observing m examples, the predicted distribution ov er the next data sample, x ( m +1) , is given by p ( x ( m +1) | x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) ) =  p ( x ( m +1) | θ ) p ( θ | x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) ) d θ . (5.68) Here each v alue of θ with p ositive probability densit y contributes to the prediction of the next example, with the contribution weigh ted b y the p osterior densit y itself. After ha ving observed { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } , if we are still quite uncertain ab out the v alue of θ , then this uncertain t y is incorp orated directly into any predictions we migh t mak e. In section 5.4 , we discussed how the frequen tist approac h addresses the uncer- tain t y in a given p oint estimate of θ b y ev aluating its v ariance. The v ariance of the estimator is an assessmen t of ho w the estimate migh t c hange with alternativ e samplings of the observ ed data. The Ba y esian answ er to the question of how to deal with the uncertaint y in the estimator is to simply integrate ov er it, which tends to protect well against ov erﬁtting. This integral is of course just an application of the la ws of probabilit y , making the Bay esian approach simple to justify , while the frequen tist mac hinery for constructing an estimator is based on the rather ad ho c decision to summarize all knowledge con tained in the dataset with a single p oin t estimate. The second imp ortant diﬀerence b etw een the Ba y esian approac h to estimation and the maximum likelihoo d approach is due to the contribution of the Ba y esian prior distribution. The prior has an inﬂuence by shifting probability mass densit y to w ards regions of the parameter space that are preferred a priori. In practice, the prior often expresses a preference for mo dels that are simpler or more smo oth. Critics of the Ba y esian approach iden tify the prior as a source of sub jectiv e human judgmen t aﬀecting the predictions. Ba y esian metho ds t ypically generalize muc h b etter when limited training data is a v ailable but typically suﬀer from high computational cost when the num ber of training examples is large. 134

HTML page 28
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Example: Ba y esian Linear Regression Here we consider the Ba y esian esti- mation approac h to learning the linear regression parameters. In linear regression, w e learn a linear mapping from an input v ector x ∈ R n to predict the v alue of a scalar y ∈ R . The prediction is parametrized by the v ector w ∈ R n : ˆ y = w  x . (5.69) Giv en a set of m training samples ( X ( train ) , y ( train ) ) , we can express the prediction of y o ver the en tire training set as ˆ y ( train ) = X ( train ) w . (5.70) Expressed as a Gaussian conditional distribution on y ( train ) , w e hav e p ( y ( train ) | X ( train ) , w ) = N ( y ( train ) ; X ( train ) w , I ) (5.71) ∝ exp  − 1 2 ( y ( train ) − X ( train ) w )  ( y ( train ) − X ( train ) w )  , (5.72) where we follow the standard MSE formulation in assuming that the Gaussian v ariance on y is one. In what follo ws, to reduce the notational burden, we refer to ( X ( train ) , y ( train ) ) as simply ( X , y ) . T o determine the p osterior distribution o v er the mo del parameter vector w , we ﬁrst need to sp ecify a prior distribution. The prior should reﬂect our naiv e b elief ab out the v alue of these parameters. While it is sometimes diﬃcult or unnatural to express our prior b eliefs in terms of the parameters of the mo del, in practice we t ypically assume a fairly broad distribution, expressing a high degree of uncertain t y ab out θ . F or real-v alued parameters it is common to use a Gaussian as a prior distribution, p ( w ) = N ( w ; µ 0 , Λ 0 ) ∝ exp  − 1 2 ( w − µ 0 )  Λ − 1 0 ( w − µ 0 )  , (5.73) where µ 0 and Λ 0 are the prior distribution mean vector and cov ariance matrix resp ectiv ely . 1 With the prior th us sp eciﬁed, w e can no w pro ceed in determining the p osterior distribution ov er the mo del parameters: p ( w | X , y ) ∝ p ( y | X , w ) p ( w ) (5.74) 1 Unless there is a reason to use a particular cov ariance structure, we typically assume a diagonal cov ariance matrix Λ 0 = diag( λ 0 ) . 135

HTML page 29
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS ∝ exp  − 1 2 ( y − X w )  ( y − X w )  exp  − 1 2 ( w − µ 0 )  Λ − 1 0 ( w − µ 0 )  (5.75) ∝ exp  − 1 2  − 2 y  X w + w  X  X w + w  Λ − 1 0 w − 2 µ  0 Λ − 1 0 w   . (5.76) W e now deﬁne Λ m =  X  X + Λ − 1 0  − 1 and µ m = Λ m  X  y + Λ − 1 0 µ 0  . Us- ing these new v ariables, we ﬁnd that the p osterior ma y b e rewritten as a Gaussian distribution: p ( w | X , y ) ∝ exp  − 1 2 ( w − µ m )  Λ − 1 m ( w − µ m ) + 1 2 µ  m Λ − 1 m µ m  (5.77) ∝ exp  − 1 2 ( w − µ m )  Λ − 1 m ( w − µ m )  . (5.78) All terms that do not include the parameter vector w ha v e b een omitted; they are implied b y the fact that the distribution m ust b e normalized to in tegrate to 1 . Equation 3.23 shows how to normalize a m ultiv ariate Gaussian distribution. Examining this p osterior distribution enables us to gain some in tuition for the eﬀect of Ba y esian inference. In most situations, we set µ 0 to 0 . If we set Λ 0 = 1 α I , then µ m giv es the same estimate of w as do es frequen tist linear regression with a w eigh t deca y p enalt y of α w  w . One diﬀerence is that the Ba y esian estimate is undeﬁned if α is set to zero—w e are not allow ed to b egin the Bay esian learning pro cess with an inﬁnitely wide prior on w . The more imp ortant diﬀerence is that the Bay esian estimate pro vides a cov ariance matrix, showing how likely all the diﬀeren t v alues of w are, rather than providing only the estimate µ m . 5.6.1 Maxim um a Posteriori (MAP) Estimation While the most principled approach is to make predictions using the full Ba y esian p osterior distribution o ver the parameter θ , it is still often desirable to hav e a single p oint estimate. One common reason for desiring a p oint estimate is that most op erations inv olving the Bay esian p osterior for most in teresting mo dels are in tractable, and a p oin t estimate oﬀers a tractable appro ximation. Rather than simply returning to the maxim um lik eliho o d estimate, we can still gain some of the b eneﬁt of the Bay esian approach by allo wing the prior to inﬂuence the choice of the p oin t estimate. One rational wa y to do this is to choose the maxim um a p osteriori (MAP) p oint estimate. The MAP estimate chooses the p oint of 136

HTML page 2a
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS maximal p osterior probability (or maximal probability densit y in the more common case of contin uous θ ): θ MAP = arg max θ p ( θ | x ) = arg max θ log p ( x | θ ) + log p ( θ ) . (5.79) W e recognize, on the righthand side, log p ( x | θ ) , that is, the standard log- lik eliho o d term, and log p ( θ ) , corresp onding to the prior distribution. As an example, consider a linear regression mo del with a Gaussian prior on the weigh ts w . If this prior is giv en by N ( w ; 0 , 1 λ I 2 ) , then the log-prior term in equation 5.79 is prop ortional to the familiar λ w  w w eigh t decay p enalty , plus a term that do es not dep end on w and do es not aﬀect the learning pro cess. MAP Ba y esian inference with a Gaussian prior on the w eigh ts thus corresp onds to weigh t deca y . As with full Ba y esian inference, MAP Ba y esian inference has the adv an tage of lev eraging information that is brought b y the prior and cannot b e found in the training data. This additional information helps to reduce the v ariance in the MAP p oint estimate (in comparison to the ML estimate). Ho w ev er, it do es so at the price of increased bias. Man y regularized estimation strategies, such as maxim um likelihoo d learning regularized with w eigh t deca y , can b e interpreted as making the MAP approxima- tion to Bay esian inference. This view applies when the regularization consists of adding an extra term to the ob jective function that corresp onds to log p ( θ ) . Not all regularization p enalties corresp ond to MAP Ba y esian inference. F or example, some regularizer terms may not b e the logarithm of a probability distribution. Other regularization terms dep end on the data, which of course a prior probabilit y distribution is not allow ed to do. MAP Ba y esian inference provides a straightforw ard w a y to design complicated y et interpretable regularization terms. F or example, a more complicated p enalty term can b e deriv ed by using a mixture of Gaussians, rather than a single Gaussian distribution, as the prior ( Nowlan and Hin ton , 1992 ). 5.7 Sup ervised Learning Algorithms Recall from section 5.1.3 that sup ervised learning algorithms are, roughly sp eaking, learning algorithms that learn to asso ciate some input with some output, given a training set of examples of inputs x and outputs y . In many cases the outputs y ma y b e diﬃcult to collect automatically and m ust b e pro vided by a human 137

HTML page 2b
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS “sup ervisor,” but the term still applies ev en when the training set targets w ere collected automatically . 5.7.1 Probabilistic Sup ervised Learning Most supervised learning algorithms in this b o ok are based on estimating a probabilit y distribution p ( y | x ) . W e can do this simply b y using maxim um lik eliho o d estimation to ﬁnd the b est parameter vector θ for a parametric family of distributions p ( y | x ; θ ) . W e hav e already seen that linear regression corresp onds to the family p ( y | x ; θ ) = N ( y ; θ  x , I ) . (5.80) W e can generalize linear regression to the classiﬁcation scenario by deﬁning a diﬀeren t family of probability distributions. If we hav e tw o classes, class 0 and class 1, then we need only sp ecify the probability of one of these classes. The probabilit y of class 1 determines the probability of class 0, b ecause these t w o v alues m ust add up to 1. The normal distribution ov er real-v alued n um b ers that w e used for linear regression is parametrized in terms of a mean. Any v alue we supply for this mean is v alid. A distribution o v er a binary v ariable is slightly more complicated, b ecause its mean must alw a ys b e b etw een 0 and 1. One wa y to solve this problem is to use the logistic sigmoid function to squash the output of the linear function in to the in terv al (0, 1) and interpret that v alue as a probabilit y: p ( y = 1 | x ; θ ) = σ ( θ  x ) . (5.81) This approach is known as logistic regression (a somewhat strange name since w e use the mo del for classiﬁcation rather than regression). In the case of linear regression, we were able to ﬁnd the optimal weigh ts b y solving the normal equations. Logistic regression is somewhat more diﬃcult. There is no closed-form solution for its optimal weigh ts. Instead, w e m ust searc h for them b y maximizing the log-likelihoo d. W e can do this by minimizing the negativ e log-lik eliho o d using gradient descent. This same strategy can b e applied to essentially an y sup ervised learning problem, b y writing down a parametric family of conditional probabilit y distributions o v er the right kind of input and output v ariables. 138

HTML page 2c
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 5.7.2 Supp ort V ector Mac hines One of the most inﬂuential approac hes to sup ervised learning is the supp ort vector mac hine ( Boser et al. , 1992 ; Cortes and V apnik , 1995 ). This mo del is similar to logistic regression in that it is driven b y a linear function w  x + b . Unlike logistic regression, the supp ort vector machine do es not provide probabilities, but only outputs a class identit y . The SVM predicts that the p ositive class is present when w  x + b is p ositive. Likewise, it predicts that the negative class is present when w  x + b is negative. One key innov ation asso ciated with supp ort vector machines is the k ernel tric k . The kernel trick consists of observing that many mac hine learning algorithms can b e written exclusively in terms of dot pro ducts betw een examples. F or example, it can b e shown that the linear function used b y the supp ort vector machine can b e re-written as w  x + b = b + m  i =1 α i x  x ( i ) , (5.82) where x ( i ) is a training example, and α is a vector of co eﬃcients. Rewriting the learning algorithm this wa y enables us to replace x with the output of a giv en feature function φ ( x ) and the dot product with a function k ( x , x ( i ) ) = φ ( x ) · φ ( x ( i ) ) called a k ernel . The · op erator represents an inner pro duct analogous to φ ( x )  φ ( x ( i ) ) . F or some feature spaces, w e may not use literally the v ector inner pro duct. In some inﬁnite dimensional spaces, we need to use other kinds of inner pro ducts, for example, inner pro ducts based on integration rather than summation. A complete dev elopmen t of these kinds of inner pro ducts is b ey ond the scop e of this b o ok. After replacing dot pro ducts with k ernel ev aluations, we can make predictions using the function f ( x ) = b +  i α i k ( x , x ( i ) ) . (5.83) This function is nonlinear with resp ect to x , but the relationship b etw een φ ( x ) and f ( x ) is linear. Also, the relationship b etw een α and f ( x ) is linear. The k ernel-based function is exactly equiv alent to prepro cessing the data by applying φ ( x ) to all inputs, then learning a linear mo del in the new transformed space. The k ernel trick is p ow erful for t w o reasons. First, it enables us to learn mo dels that are nonlinear as a function of x using conv ex optimization techniques that are guaran teed to conv erge eﬃcien tly . This is p ossible b ecause we consider φ ﬁxed and optimize only α , that is, the optimization algorithm can view the decision function as b eing linear in a diﬀeren t space. Second, the kernel function k often 139

HTML page 2d
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS admits an implementation that is signiﬁcantly more computationally eﬃcien t than naiv ely constructing tw o φ ( x ) vectors and explicitly taking their dot pro duct. In some cases, φ ( x ) can even b e inﬁnite dimensional, which would result in an inﬁnite computational cost for the naive, explicit approach. In many cases, k ( x , x  ) is a nonlinear, tractable function of x ev en when φ ( x ) is intractable. As an example of an inﬁnite-dimensional feature space with a tractable k ernel, we construct a feature mapping φ ( x ) ov er the nonnegative in tegers x . Suppose that this mapping returns a vector containing x ones follo w ed b y inﬁnitely many zeros. W e can write a kernel function k ( x, x ( i ) ) = min ( x, x ( i ) ) that is exactly equiv alent to the corresp onding inﬁnite-dimensional dot pro duct. The most commonly used kernel is the Gaussian kernel , k ( u , v ) = N ( u − v ; 0 , σ 2 I ) , (5.84) where N ( x ; µ , Σ ) is the standard normal density . This kernel is also kno wn as the radial basis function (RBF) kernel, b ecause its v alue decreases along lines in v space radiating outw ard from u . The Gaussian k ernel corresp onds to a dot pro duct in an inﬁnite-dimensional space, but the deriv ation of this space is less straigh tforw ard than in our example of the min k ernel ov er the integers. W e can think of the Gaussian k ernel as p erforming a kind of template match- ing . A training example x asso ciated with training lab el y b ecomes a template for class y . When a test p oin t x  is near x according to Euclidean distance, the Gaussian kernel has a large resp onse, indicating that x  is very similar to the x template. The mo del then puts a large weigh t on the asso ciated training lab el y . Ov erall, the prediction will combine man y such training lab els weigh ted by the similarit y of the corresp onding training examples. Supp ort vector machines are not the only algorithm that can b e enhanced using the kernel tric k. Man y other linear mo dels can b e enhanced in this w a y . The category of algorithms that emplo y the kernel trick is kno wn as k ernel machines , or kernel metho ds ( Williams and Rasmussen , 1996 ; Schölk opf et al. , 1999 ). A ma jor dra wbac k to kernel machines is that the cost of ev aluating the decision function is linear in the n um b er of training examples, b ecause the i -th example con tributes a term α i k ( x , x ( i ) ) to the decision function. Supp ort vector machines are able to mitigate this by learning an α v ector that contains mostly zeros. Classifying a new example then requires ev aluating the k ernel function only for the training examples that ha v e nonzero α i . These training examples are known as supp ort v ectors . Kernel machines also suﬀer from a high computational cost of training when the dataset is large. W e revisit this idea in section 5.9 . Kernel machines with 140

HTML page 2e
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS generic kernels struggle to generalize well. W e explain wh y in section 5.11 . The mo dern incarnation of deep learning was designed to o v ercome these limitations of k ernel mac hines. The current deep learning renaissance b egan when Hin ton et al. ( 2006 ) demonstrated that a neural net w ork could outp erform the RBF kernel SVM on the MNIST b enchmark. 5.7.3 Other Simple Sup ervised Learning Algorithms W e hav e already brieﬂy encountered another nonprobabilistic sup ervised learning algorithm, nearest neigh b or regression. More generally , k -nearest neighbors is a family of tec hniques that can b e used for classiﬁcation or regression. As a nonparametric learning algorithm, k -nearest neigh b ors is not restricted to a ﬁxed n um b er of parameters. W e usually think of the k -nearest neigh b ors algorithm as not having any parameters but rather implementing a simple function of the training data. In fact, there is not ev en really a training stage or learning pro cess. Instead, at test time, when w e w an t to pro duce an output y for a new test input x , w e ﬁnd the k -nearest neighbors to x in the training data X . W e then return the a v erage of the corresp onding y v alues in the training set. This works for essen tially an y kind of sup ervised learning where w e can deﬁne an a v erage o v er y v alues. In the case of classiﬁcation, w e can av erage ov er one-hot co de v ectors c with c y = 1 and c i = 0 for all other v alues of i . W e can then in terpret the av erage ov er these one-hot co des as giving a probability distribution ov er classes. As a nonparametric learning algorithm, k -nearest neighbor can ac hiev e v ery high capacity . F or example, supp ose w e hav e a m ulticlass classiﬁcation task and measure p erformance with 0-1 loss. In this setting, 1 -nearest neighbor conv erges to double the Ba y es error as the n um b er of training examples approac hes inﬁnit y . The error in excess of the Bay es error results from choosing a single neighbor b y breaking ties b et w een equally distan t neigh b ors randomly . When there is inﬁnite training data, all test p oints x will hav e inﬁnitely man y training set neigh b ors at distance zero. If we allo w the algorithm to use all these neighbors to v ote, rather than randomly c ho osing one of them, the pro cedure conv erges to the Bay es error rate. The high capacity of k -nearest neighbors enables it to obtain high accuracy giv en a large training set. It do es so at high computational cost, ho w ev er, and it may generalize very badly giv en a small ﬁnite training set. One weakness of k -nearest neighbors is that it cannot learn that one feature is more discriminative than another. F or example, imagine w e ha v e a regression task with x ∈ R 100 dra wn from an isotropic Gaussian distribution, but only a single v ariable x 1 is relev ant to the output. Supp ose further that this feature simply enco des the output directly , that y = x 1 in all cases. Nearest neighbor regression will not b e able to detect this simple pattern. 141

HTML page 2f
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS The nearest neigh b or of most p oin ts x will b e determined b y the large num ber of features x 2 through x 100 , not b y the lone feature x 1 . Th us the output on small training sets will essentially b e random. Another type of learning algorithm that also breaks the input space in to regions and has separate parameters for eac h region is the decision tree ( Breiman et al. , 1984 ) and its many v ariants. As shown in ﬁgure 5.7 , each no de of the decision tree is asso ciated with a region in the input space, and internal no des break that region in to one subregion for eac h c hild of the no de (t ypically using an axis-aligned cut). Space is th us sub divided into nono v erlapping regions, with a one-to-one corresp ondence b et w een leaf no des and input regions. Eac h leaf no de usually maps ev ery p oint in its input region to the same output. Decision trees are usually trained with sp ecialized algorithms that are b ey ond the scop e of this b o ok. The learning algorithm can b e considered nonparametric if it is allow ed to learn a tree of arbitrary size, though decision trees are usually regularized with size constraints that turn them into parametric mo dels in practice. Decision trees as they are t ypically used, with axis-aligned splits and constant outputs within eac h no de, struggle to solve some problems that are easy ev en for logistic regression. F or example, if we ha v e a tw o-class problem, and the p ositive class o ccurs wherever x 2 > x 1 , the decision b oundary is not axis aligned. The decision tree will th us need to approximate the decision b oundary with many no des, implementing a step function that constan tly walks bac k and forth across the true decision function with axis-aligned steps. As we ha ve seen, nearest neighbor predictors and decision trees hav e many limitations. Nonetheless, they are useful learning algorithms when computational resources are constrained. W e can also build intuition for more sophisticated learning algorithms b y thinking ab out the similarities and diﬀerences b etw een sophisticated algorithms and k -nearest neighbors or decision tree baselines. See Murph y ( 2012 ), Bishop ( 2006 ), Hastie et al. ( 2001 ) or other mac hine learning textb o oks for more material on traditional sup ervised learning algorithms. 5.8 Unsup ervised Learning Algorithms Recall from section 5.1.3 that unsup ervised algorithms are those that exp erience only “features” but not a sup ervision signal. The distinction b et w een sup ervised and unsup ervised algorithms is not formally and rigidly deﬁned b ecause there is no ob jectiv e test for distinguishing whether a v alue is a feature or a target provided by a sup ervisor. Informally , unsup ervised learning refers to most attempts to extract information from a distribution that do not require h uman lab or to annotate 142

HTML page 30
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 0 1 01 111 0 1 011 1111 1110 110 10 010 00 1110 1111 110 10 01 00 010 011 11 111 11 Figure 5.7: Diagrams describing ho w a decision tree w orks. (T op) Each no de of the tree c ho oses to send the input example to the child no de on the left (0) or to the c hild node on the right (1). Internal no des are drawn as circles and leaf no des as squares. Each no de is displa y ed with a binary string identiﬁer corresp onding to its p osition in the tree, obtained b y app ending a bit to its paren t iden tiﬁer (0 = c ho ose left or top, 1 = choose righ t or b ottom). (Bottom) The tree divides space into regions. The 2-D plane sho ws ho w a decision tree might divide R 2 . The no des of the tree are plotted in this plane, with each internal no de drawn along the dividing line it uses to categorize examples, and leaf no des dra wn in the center of the region of examples they receiv e. The result is a piecewise-constant function, with one piece per leaf. Eac h leaf requires at least one training example to deﬁne, so it is not possible for the decision tree to learn a function that has more lo cal maxima than the n umber of training examples. 143

HTML page 31
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS examples. The term is usually asso ciated with densit y estimation, learning to dra w samples from a distribution, learning to denoise data from some distribution, ﬁnding a manifold that the data lies near, or clustering the data into groups of related examples. A classic unsup ervised learning task is to ﬁnd the “b est” represen tation of the data. By “b est” we can mean diﬀerent things, but generally sp eaking we are lo oking for a represen tation that preserv es as m uc h information ab out x as p ossible while ob eying some p enalt y or constrain t aimed at keeping the representation simpler or more accessible than x itself. There are m ultiple w ays of deﬁning a simpler representation. Three of the most common include low er-dimensional representations, sparse represen tations, and indep endent representations. Low-dimensional represen tations attempt to compress as muc h information about x as p ossible in a smaller represen tation. Sparse representations ( Barlo w , 1989 ; Olshausen and Field , 1996 ; Hin ton and Ghahramani , 1997 ) em b ed the dataset into a representation whose entries are mostly zeros for most inputs. The use of sparse representations typically requires increasing the dimensionality of the representation, so that the represen tation b ecoming mostly zeros do es not discard to o muc h information. This results in an o v erall structure of the represen tation that tends to distribute data along the axes of the representation space. Indep enden t representations attempt to disentangle the sources of v ariation underlying the data distribution such that the dimensions of the representation are statistically indep endent . Of course these three criteria are certainly not m utually exclusiv e. Lo w- dimensional representations often yield elements that hav e fewer or weak er de- p endencies than the original high-dimensional data. This is b ecause one wa y to reduce the size of a represen tation is to ﬁnd and remov e redundancies. Identifying and remo ving more redundancy enables the dimensionalit y reduction algorithm to ac hiev e more compression while discarding less information. The notion of representation is one of the central themes of deep learning and therefore one of the central themes in this b o ok. In this section, we develop some simple examples of represen tation learning algorithms. T ogether, these example algorithms sho w ho w to op erationalize all three of the criteria ab ov e. Most of the remaining chapters introduce additional represen tation learning algorithms that dev elop these criteria in diﬀerent wa ys or introduce other criteria. 144

HTML page 32
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS − 20 − 10 0 10 20 x 1 − 20 − 10 0 10 20 x 2 − 20 − 10 0 10 20 z 1 − 20 − 10 0 10 20 z 2 Figure 5.8: PCA learns a linear pro jection that aligns the direction of greatest v ariance with the axes of the new space. (L eft) The original data consist of samples of x . In this space, the v ariance might o ccur along directions that are not axis aligned. (R ight) The transformed data z = x  W no w v aries most along the axis z 1 . The direction of second-most v ariance is no w along z 2 . 5.8.1 Principal Comp onen ts Analysis In section 2.12 , w e sa w that the principal comp onen ts analysis algorithm pro vides a means of compressing data. W e can also view PCA as an unsup ervised learning algorithm that learns a represen tation of data. This representation is based on t w o of the criteria for a simple representation describ ed ab ov e. PCA learns a represen tation that has low er dimensionality than the original input. It also learns a representation whose elements ha v e no linear correlation with eac h other. This is a ﬁrst step tow ard the criterion of learning representations whose elements are statistically indep enden t. T o achiev e full indep endence, a representation learning algorithm must also remov e the nonlinear relationships b et w een v ariables. PCA learns an orthogonal, linear transformation of the data that pro jects an input x to a represen tation z as sho wn in ﬁgure 5.8 . In section 2.12 , we saw that w e could learn a one-dimensional representation that b est reconstructs the original data (in the sense of mean squared error) and that this representation actually corresp onds to the ﬁrst principal comp onent of the data. Th us we can use PCA as a simple and eﬀectiv e dimensionalit y reduction metho d that preserv es as m uc h of the information in the data as p ossible (again, as measured b y least-squares reconstruction error). In the follo wing, w e will study ho w the PCA represen tation decorrelates the original data representation X . Let us consider the m × n design matrix X . W e will assume that the data has 145

HTML page 33
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS a mean of zero, E [ x ] = 0 . If this is not the case, the data can easily b e cen tered b y subtracting the mean from all examples in a prepro cessing step. The unbiased sample cov ariance matrix asso ciated with X is giv en by V ar[ x ] = 1 m − 1 X  X . (5.85) PCA ﬁnds a representation (through linear transformation) z = W  x , where V ar[ z ] is diagonal. In section 2.12 , we saw that the principal comp onents of a design matrix X are given by the eigenv ectors of X  X . F rom this view, X  X = W Λ W  . (5.86) In this section, w e exploit an alternativ e deriv ation of the principal comp onents. The principal comp onen ts may also b e obtained via singular v alue decomp osition (SVD). Sp eciﬁcally , they are the right singular vectors of X . T o see this, let W b e the right singular v ectors in the decomp osition X = U Σ W  . W e then recov er the original eigenv ector equation with W as the eigenv ector basis: X  X =  U Σ W    U Σ W  = W Σ 2 W  . (5.87) The SVD is helpful to sho w that PCA results in a diagonal V ar [ z ] . Using the SVD of X , we can express the v ariance of X as: V ar[ x ] = 1 m − 1 X  X (5.88) = 1 m − 1 ( U Σ W  )  U Σ W  (5.89) = 1 m − 1 W Σ  U  U Σ W  (5.90) = 1 m − 1 W Σ 2 W  , (5.91) where w e use the fact that U  U = I b ecause the U matrix of the singular v alue decomp osition is deﬁned to b e orthogonal. This shows that the co v ariance of z is diagonal as required: V ar[ z ] = 1 m − 1 Z  Z (5.92) = 1 m − 1 W  X  X W (5.93) 146

HTML page 34
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS = 1 m − 1 W  W Σ 2 W  W (5.94) = 1 m − 1 Σ 2 , (5.95) where this time we use the fact that W  W = I , again from the deﬁnition of the SVD. The ab o v e analysis shows that when we pro ject the data x to z , via the linear transformation W , the resulting representation has a diagonal cov ariance matrix (as giv en b y Σ 2 ), whic h immediately implies that the individual elemen ts of z are m utually uncorrelated. This abilit y of PCA to transform data into a represen tation where the elements are mutually uncorrelated is a v ery imp ortant prop erty of PCA. It is a simple example of a representation that attempts to disentangle the unknown factors of variation underlying the data. In the case of PCA, this disen tangling takes the form of ﬁnding a rotation of the input space (describ ed by W ) that aligns the principal axes of v ariance with the basis of the new representation space asso ciated with z . While correlation is an imp ortant category of dep endency b etw een elements of the data, we are also interested in learning representations that disentangle more complicated forms of feature dep endencies. F or this, we will need more than what can b e done with a simple linear transformation. 5.8.2 k -means Clustering Another example of a simple represen tation learning algorithm is k -means clustering. The k -means clustering algorithm divides the training set into k diﬀeren t clusters of examples that are near each other. W e can thus think of the algorithm as pro viding a k -dimensional one-hot co de vector h represen ting an input x . If x b elongs to cluster i , then h i = 1 , and all other entries of the represen tation h are zero. The one-hot co de provided b y k -means clustering is an example of a sparse represen tation, b ecause the ma jority of its entries are zero for ev ery input. Later, w e dev elop other algorithms that learn more ﬂexible sparse representations, where more than one en try can b e nonzero for eac h input x . One-hot co des are an extreme example of sparse representations that lose many of the b eneﬁts of a distributed represen tation. The one-hot co de still confers some statistical adv antages (it naturally conv eys the idea that all examples in the same cluster are similar to each other), and it confers the computational adv antage that the entire represen tation 147

HTML page 35
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS ma y b e captured by a single in teger. The k -means algorithm works by initializing k diﬀeren t cen troids { µ (1) , . . . , µ ( k ) } to diﬀeren t v alues, then alternating b etw een tw o diﬀerent steps until conv ergence. In one step, each training example is assigned to cluster i , where i is the index of the nearest centroid µ ( i ) . In the other step, each cen troid µ ( i ) is up dated to the mean of all training examples x ( j ) assigned to cluster i . One diﬃculty p ertaining to clustering is that the clustering problem is inherently ill p osed, in the sense that there is no single criterion that measures how well a clustering of the data corresp onds to the real world. W e can measure prop erties of the clustering, such as the av erage Euclidean distance from a cluster centroid to the members of the cluster. This enables us to tell ho w well we are able to reconstruct the training data from the cluster assignments. W e do not know how w ell the cluster assignments corresp ond to prop erties of the real w orld. Moreo v er, there ma y b e man y diﬀeren t clusterings that all corresp ond well to some prop erty of the real w orld. W e may hop e to ﬁnd a clustering that relates to one feature but obtain a diﬀeren t, equally v alid clustering that is not relev an t to our task. F or example, supp ose that we run tw o clustering algorithms on a dataset consisting of images of red trucks, images of red cars, images of gray trucks, and images of gray cars. If we ask eac h clustering algorithm to ﬁnd tw o clusters, one algorithm ma y ﬁnd a cluster of cars and a cluster of truc ks, while another ma y ﬁnd a cluster of red v ehicles and a cluster of gray vehicles. Supp ose we also run a third clustering algorithm, whic h is allo w ed to determine the num ber of clusters. This may assign the examples to four clusters, red cars, red trucks, gra y cars, and gray truc ks. This new clustering no w at least captures information ab out b oth attributes, but it has lost information ab out similarity . Red cars are in a diﬀeren t cluster from gra y cars, just as they are in a diﬀerent cluster from gray truc ks. The output of the clustering algorithm do es not tell us that red cars are more similar to gray cars than they are to gray trucks. They are diﬀerent from b oth things, and that is all w e kno w. These issues illustrate some of the reasons that we may prefer a distributed represen tation to a one-hot represen tation. A distributed representation could ha v e t w o attributes for eac h vehicle—one representing its color and one representing whether it is a car or a truc k. It is still not en tirely clear what the optimal distributed representation is (how can the learning algorithm kno w whether the t w o attributes we are in terested in are color and car-versus-truc k rather than man ufacturer and age?), but having many attributes reduces the burden on the algorithm to guess which single attribute we care ab out, and gives us the ability to measure similarity betw een ob jects in a ﬁne-grained w a y by comparing many 148

HTML page 36
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS attributes instead of just testing whether one attribute matc hes. 5.9 Sto c hastic Gradien t Descen t Nearly all of deep learning is p o w ered b y one very imp ortant algorithm: sto c hastic gradien t descen t (SGD). Sto chastic gradient descen t is an extension of the gradien t descen t algorithm introduced in section 4.3 . A recurring problem in machine learning is that large training sets are necessary for go o d generalization, but large training sets are also more computationally exp ensiv e. The cost function used b y a mac hine learning algorithm often decomp oses as a sum ov er training examples of some p er-example loss function. F or example, the negativ e conditional log-likelihoo d of the training data can b e written as J ( θ ) = E x , y ∼ ˆ p data L ( x , y , θ ) = 1 m m  i =1 L ( x ( i ) , y ( i ) , θ ) , (5.96) where L is the p er-example loss L ( x , y , θ ) = − log p ( y | x ; θ ) . F or these additiv e cost functions, gradient descent requires computing ∇ θ J ( θ ) = 1 m m  i =1 ∇ θ L ( x ( i ) , y ( i ) , θ ) . (5.97) The computational cost of this op eration is O ( m ) . As the training set size gro ws to billions of examples, the time to tak e a single gradien t step b ecomes prohibitively long. The insight of SGD is that the gradien t is an exp ectation. The exp ectation may b e approximately estimated using a small set of samples. Sp eciﬁcally , on eac h step of the algorithm, w e can sample a minibatc h of examples B = { x (1) , . . . , x ( m  ) } dra wn uniformly from the training set. The minibatc h size m  is t ypically chosen to b e a relatively small num ber of examples, ranging from one to a few hundred. Crucially , m  is usually held ﬁxed as the training set size m gro ws. W e may ﬁt a training set with billions of examples using up dates computed on only a hundred examples. The estimate of the gradient is formed as g = 1 m  ∇ θ m   i =1 L ( x ( i ) , y ( i ) , θ ) (5.98) 149

HTML page 37
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS using examples from the minibatch B . The sto chastic gradient descen t algorithm then follows the estimated gradient do wnhill: θ ← θ −  g , (5.99) where  is the learning rate. Gradien t descent in general has often b een regarded as slo w or unreliable. In the past, the application of gradient descen t to noncon v ex optimization problems w as regarded as fo olhardy or unprincipled. T o da y , we know that the machine learning mo dels describ ed in part I I w ork very well when trained with gradien t descen t. The optimization algorithm may not b e guaran teed to arrive at even a lo cal minim um in a reasonable amount of time, but it often ﬁnds a very low v alue of the cost function quickly enough to b e useful. Sto c hastic gradient descent has many imp ortan t uses outside the con text of deep learning. It is the main wa y to train large linear mo dels on very large datasets. F or a ﬁxed mo del size, the cost p er SGD up date do es not dep end on the training set size m . In practice, we often use a larger mo del as the training set size increases, but we are not forced to do so. The n um b er of up dates required to reach con v ergence usually increases with training set size. Ho w ev er, as m approac hes inﬁnit y , the mo del will even tually con v erge to its b est p ossible test error b efore SGD has sampled every example in the training set. Increasing m further will not extend the amoun t of training time needed to reac h the mo del’s b est p ossible test error. F rom this p oint of view, one can argue that the asymptotic cost of training a mo del with SGD is O (1) as a function of m . Prior to the adven t of deep learning, the main wa y to learn nonlinear mo dels w as to use the kernel trick in com bination with a linear mo del. Many kernel learning algorithms require constructing an m × m matrix G i,j = k ( x ( i ) , x ( j ) ) . Constructing this matrix has computational cost O ( m 2 ) , whic h is clearly undesirable for datasets with billions of examples. In academia, starting in 2006, deep learning w as initially interesting b ecause it w as able to generalize to new examples b etter than comp eting algorithms when trained on medium-sized datasets with tens of thousands of examples. So on after, deep learning garnered additional interest in industry b ecause it pro vided a scalable wa y of training nonlinear mo dels on large datasets. Sto c hastic gradient descen t and many enhancemen ts to it are describ ed further in chapter 8 . 150

HTML page 38
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 5.10 Building a Mac hine Learning Algorithm Nearly all deep learning algorithms can b e describ ed as particular instances of a fairly simple recip e: combine a sp eciﬁcation of a dataset, a cost function, an optimization pro cedure and a mo del. F or example, the linear regression algorithm combines a dataset consisting of X and y , the cost function J ( w , b ) = − E x , y ∼ ˆ p data log p model ( y | x ) , (5.100) the mo del sp eciﬁcation p model ( y | x ) = N ( y ; x  w + b, 1) , and, in most cases, the optimization algorithm deﬁned b y solving for where the gradient of the cost is zero using the normal equations. By realizing that we can replace any of these comp onen ts mostly independently from the others, we can obtain a wide range of algorithms. The cost function t ypically includes at least one term that causes the learning pro cess to p erform statistical estimation. The most common cost function is the negativ e log-likelihoo d, so that minimizing the cost function causes maxim um lik eliho o d estimation. The cost function ma y also include additional terms, such as regularization terms. F or example, we can add weigh t decay to the linear regression cost function to obtain J ( w , b ) = λ || w || 2 2 − E x , y ∼ ˆ p data log p model ( y | x ) . (5.101) This still allows closed form optimization. If we c hange the mo del to b e nonlinear, then most cost functions can no longer b e optimized in closed form. This requires us to c ho ose an iterative numerical optimization pro cedure, such as gradient descen t. The recip e for constructing a learning algorithm by com bining mo dels, costs, and optimization algorithms supp orts b oth sup ervised and unsup ervised learning. The linear regression example sho ws how to supp ort sup ervised learning. Unsup ervised learning can b e supp orted by deﬁning a dataset that contains only X and pro viding an appropriate unsup ervised cost and mo del. F or example, w e can obtain the ﬁrst PCA v ector by sp ecifying that our loss function is J ( w ) = E x ∼ ˆ p data || x − r ( x ; w ) || 2 2 (5.102) while our mo del is deﬁned to ha v e w with norm one and reconstruction function r ( x ) = w  xw . 151

HTML page 39
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS In some cases, the cost function may b e a function that w e cannot actually ev aluate, for computational reasons. In these cases, we can still appro ximately minimize it using iterative n umerical optimization, as long as w e hav e some wa y of appro ximating its gradients. Most machine learning algorithms mak e use of this recip e, though it may not b e immediately obvious. If a mac hine learning algorithm seems especially unique or hand designed, it can usually b e understo o d as using a sp ecial-case optimizer. Some mo dels, suc h as decision trees and k -means, require sp ecial-case optimizers b ecause their cost functions hav e ﬂat regions that make them inappropriate for minimization b y gradien t-based optimizers. Recognizing that most mac hine learning algorithms can b e describ ed using this recip e helps to see the diﬀeren t algorithms as part of a taxonom y of metho ds for doing related tasks that w ork for similar reasons, rather than as a long list of algorithms that eac h hav e separate justiﬁcations. 5.11 Challenges Motiv ating Deep Learning The simple machine learning algorithms describ ed in this chapter w ork well on a wide v ariety of imp ortant problems. They ha v e not succeeded, how ev er, in solving the central problems in AI, such as recognizing sp eech or recognizing ob jects. The developmen t of deep learning was motiv ated in part b y the failure of traditional algorithms to generalize well on suc h AI tasks. This section is ab out how the challenge of generalizing to new examples b ecomes exp onen tially more diﬃcult when working with high-dimensional data, and how the mechanisms used to achiev e generalization in traditional mac hine learning are insuﬃcien t to learn complicated functions in high-dimensional spaces. Such spaces also often imp ose high computational costs. Deep learning was designed to o v ercome these and other obstacles. 5.11.1 The Curse of Dimensionality Man y machine learning problems b ecome exceedingly diﬃcult when the num ber of dimensions in the data is high. This phenomenon is known as the curse of dimensionalit y . Of particular concern is that the num b er of p ossible distinct conﬁgurations of a set of v ariables increases exp onentially as the n um b er of v ariables increases. The curse of dimensionality arises in many places in computer science, esp ecially in machine learning. 152

HTML page 3a
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Figure 5.9: As the num ber of relev an t dimensions of the data increases (from left to righ t), the num ber of c onﬁgurations of interest may grow exp onentially . (L eft) In this one-dimensional example, we ha v e one v ariable for which we only care to distinguish 10 regions of in terest. With enough examples falling within eac h of these regions (each region corresp onds to a cell in the illustration), learning algorithms can easily generalize correctly . A straigh tforw ard w ay to generalize is to estimate the v alue of the target function within eac h region (and p ossibly in terp olate betw een neighboring regions). (Center) With t w o dimensions, it is more diﬃcult to distinguish 10 diﬀerent v alues of each v ariable. W e need to k eep trac k of up to 10 × 10 = 100 regions, and we need at least that man y examples to co v er all those regions. (Right) With three dimensions, this grows to 10 3 = 1 , 000 regions and at least that many examples. F or d dimensions and v v alues to b e distinguished along eac h axis, w e seem to need O ( v d ) regions and examples. This is an instance of the curse of dimensionalit y . Figure graciously pro vided b y Nicolas Chapados. One c hallenge p osed b y the curse of dimensionalit y is a statistical c hallenge. As illustrated in ﬁgure 5.9 , a statistical challenge arises b ecause the num ber of p ossible conﬁgurations of x is m uc h larger than the num ber of training examples. T o understand the issue, let us consider that the input space is organized in to a grid, as in the ﬁgure. W e can describ e low-dimensional space with a small num ber of grid cells that are mostly occupied b y the data. When generalizing to a new data p oin t, we can usually tell what to do simply by insp ecting the training examples that lie in the same cell as the new input. F or example, if estimating the probabilit y densit y at some p oin t x , we can just return the n um b er of training examples in the same unit v olume cell as x , divided b y the total n um b er of training examples. If w e wish to classify an example, we can return the most common class of training examples in the same cell. If we are doing regression, w e can av erage the target v alues observed ov er the examples in that cell. But what ab out the cells for which w e ha v e seen no example? Because in high-dimensional spaces, the num b er of conﬁgurations is h uge, m uc h larger than our num ber of examples, a t ypical grid cell has no training example asso ciated with it. How could we p ossibly say something meaningful ab out these new conﬁgurations? Many traditional machine learning 153

HTML page 3b
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS algorithms simply assume that the output at a new p oint should b e approximately the same as the output at the nearest training p oint. 5.11.2 Lo cal Constancy and Smo othness Regularization T o generalize w ell, mac hine learning algorithms need to b e guided b y prior b eliefs ab out what kind of function they should learn. W e hav e seen these priors incorp o- rated as explicit b eliefs in the form of probability distributions o v er parameters of the mo del. More informally , w e may also discuss prior b eliefs as directly inﬂuencing the function itself and inﬂuencing the parameters only indirectly , as a result of the relationship b et w een the parameters and the function. Additionally , we informally discuss prior beliefs as b eing expressed implicitly by choosing algorithms that are biased to w ard choosing some class of functions ov er another, ev en though these biases may not b e expressed (or even be p ossible to express) in terms of a probabilit y distribution representing our degree of b elief in v arious functions. Among the most widely used of these implicit “priors” is the smo othness prior , or lo cal constancy prior . This prior states that the function w e learn should not change very muc h within a small region. Man y simpler algorithms rely exclusiv ely on this prior to generalize well, and as a result, they fail to scale to the statistical c hallenges in volv ed in solving AI- lev el tasks. Throughout this b o ok, we describ e ho w deep learning introduces additional (explicit and implicit) priors in order to reduce the generalization error on sophisticated tasks. Here, w e explain why the smo othness prior alone is insuﬃcien t for these tasks. There are man y diﬀerent wa ys to implicitly or explicitly express a prior b elief that the learned function should b e smo oth or lo cally constan t. All these diﬀerent metho ds are designed to encourage the learning pro cess to learn a function f ∗ that satisﬁes the condition f ∗ ( x ) ≈ f ∗ ( x +  ) (5.103) for most conﬁgurations x and small change  . In other words, if we kno w a go o d answ er for an input x (for example, if x is a lab eled training example), then that answ er is probably go o d in the neigh b orho o d of x . If we ha v e several go o d answers in some neighborho o d, we would combine them (by some form of av eraging or in terp olation) to pro duce an answer that agrees with as many of them as muc h as p ossible. An extreme example of the lo cal constancy approach is the k -nearest neigh b ors family of learning algorithms. These predictors are literally constant ov er each region con taining all the p oints x that ha v e the same set of k nearest neigh b ors in 154

HTML page 3c
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS the training set. F or k = 1 , the num b er of distinguishable regions cannot b e more than the num ber of training examples. While the k -nearest neighbors algorithm copies the output from nearby training examples, most kernel machines in terp olate b et w een training set outputs asso ciated with nearb y training examples. An imp ortant class of kernels is the family of lo cal k ernels , where k ( u , v ) is large when u = v and decreases as u and v gro w further apart from eac h other. A lo cal kernel can b e though t of as a similarity function that p erforms template matching, b y measuring ho w closely a test example x resem bles each training example x ( i ) . Muc h of the mo dern motiv ation for deep learning is derived from studying the limitations of lo cal template matching and ho w deep mo dels are able to succeed in cases where lo cal template matching fails ( Bengio et al. , 2006b ). Decision trees also suﬀer from the limitations of exclusively smo othness-based learning, b ecause they break the input space into as many regions as there are lea v es and use a separate parameter (or sometimes man y parameters for extensions of decision trees) in each region. If the target function requires a tree with at least n lea v es to b e represented accurately , then at least n training examples are required to ﬁt the tree. A m ultiple of n is needed to achiev e some level of statistical conﬁdence in the predicted output. In general, to distinguish O ( k ) regions in input space, all these metho ds require O ( k ) examples. Typically there are O ( k ) parameters, with O (1) parameters asso ciated with eac h of the O ( k ) regions. The nearest neighbor scenario, in which eac h training example can b e used to deﬁne at most one region, is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.10 . Is there a w a y to represen t a complex function that has many more regions to b e distinguished than the n um b er of training examples? Clearly , assuming only smo othness of the underlying function will not allo w a learner to do that. F or example, imagine that the target function is a kind of chec k erboard. A chec k erboard con tains many v ariations, but there is a simple structure to them. Imagine what happ ens when the n um b er of training examples is substantially smaller than the n um b er of black and white squares on the c heck erb oard. Based on only lo cal generalization and the smo othness or lo cal constancy prior, the learner would b e guaran teed to correctly guess the color of a new p oint if it lay within the same c hec k erb oard square as a training example. There is no guarantee, ho w ev er, that the learner could correctly extend the chec k erb oard pattern to p oints lying in squares that do not contain training examples. With this prior alone, the only information that an example tells us is the color of its square, and the only wa y to get the colors of the en tire c hec k erb oard right is to co v er eac h of its cells with at 155

HTML page 3d
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS least one example. The smo othness assumption and the asso ciated nonparametric learning algo- rithms w ork extremely well as long as there are enough examples for the learning algorithm to observ e high p oints on most p eaks and low p oints on most v alleys of the true underlying function to b e learned. This is generally true when the function to b e learned is smo oth enough and v aries in few enough dimensions. In high dimensions, ev en a very smo oth function can change smo othly but in a diﬀeren t wa y along each dimension. If the function additionally b eha v es diﬀerently in v arious regions, it can b ecome extremely complicated to describ e with a set of training examples. If the function is complicated (w e wan t to distinguish a huge n um b er of regions compared to the num b er of examples), is there an y hop e to generalize well? The answer to b oth of these questions—whether it is p ossible to represent a complicated function eﬃcien tly , and whether it is possible for the estimated function to generalize w ell to new inputs—is y es. The key insigh t is that a very large n um b er of regions, suc h as O (2 k ) , can be deﬁned with O ( k ) examples, so long as we Figure 5.10: Illustration of how the nearest neigh b or algorithm breaks up the input space in to regions. An example (represented here b y a circle) within each region deﬁnes the region b oundary (represented here by the lines). The y v alue asso ciated with each example deﬁnes what the output should b e for all p oints within the corresp onding region. The regions deﬁned b y nearest neighbor matching form a geometric pattern called a V oronoi diagram. The n um ber of these contiguous regions cannot gro w faster than the num ber of training examples. While this ﬁgure illustrates the b ehavior of the nearest neighbor algorithm sp eciﬁcally , other mac hine learning algorithms that rely exclusiv ely on the lo cal smoothness prior for generalization exhibit similar b ehaviors: each training example only informs the learner ab out how to generalize in some neighborho o d immediately surrounding that example. 156

HTML page 3e
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS in tro duce some dep endencies b et w een the regions through additional assumptions ab out the underlying data-generating distribution. In this wa y , we can actually generalize nonlo cally ( Bengio and Monp errus , 2005 ; Bengio et al. , 2006c ). Man y diﬀeren t deep learning algorithms provide implicit or explicit assumptions that are reasonable for a broad range of AI tasks in order to capture these adv antages. Other approaches to machine learning often make stronger, task-sp eciﬁc as- sumptions. F or example, we could easily solve the ch ec k erb oard task b y provid ing the assumption that the target function is p erio dic. Usually we do not include suc h strong, task-sp eciﬁc assumptions in neural netw orks so that they can generalize to a muc h wider v ariety of structures. AI tasks ha v e structure that is m uc h to o complex to b e limited to simple, manually sp eciﬁed prop erties such as p erio dicity , so we wan t learning algorithms that em b o dy more general-purp ose assumptions. The core idea in deep learning is that we assume that the data w as generated by the c omp osition of factors , or features, p otentially at multiple lev els in a hierar- c h y . Many other similarly generic assumptions can further impro v e deep learning algorithms. These apparently mild assumptions allow an exp onential gain in the relationship b et w een the num ber of examples and the num ber of regions that can b e distinguished. W e describ e these exp onen tial gains more precisely in sections 6.4.1 , 15.4 and 15.5 . The exp onential adv an tages conferred b y the use of deep distributed represen tations coun ter the exp onential challenges p osed by the curse of dimensionality . 5.11.3 Manifold Learning An imp ortant concept underlying man y ideas in machine learning is that of a manifold. A manifold is a connected region. Mathematically , it is a set of points asso ciated with a neighborho o d around each p oint. F rom an y given p oin t, the manifold lo cally app ears to b e a Euclidean space. In ev eryda y life, we exp erience the surface of the world as a 2-D plane, but it is in fact a spherical manifold in 3-D space. The concept of a neighborho o d surrounding eac h p oin t implies the existence of transformations that can b e applied to mov e on the manifold from one p osition to a neighboring one. In the example of the world’s surface as a manifold, one can w alk north, south, east, or west. Although there is a formal mathematical meaning to the term “manifold,” in mac hine learning it tends to b e used more lo osely to designate a connected set of p oints that can b e approximated w ell by considering only a small num b er of 157

HTML page 3f
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 − 1 . 0 − 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 Figure 5.11: Data sampled from a distribution in a tw o-dimensional space that is actually concen trated near a one-dimensional manifold, like a twisted string. The solid line indicates the underlying manifold that the learner should infer. degrees of freedom, or dimensions, embedded in a higher-dimensional space. Each dimension corresp onds to a lo cal direction of v ariation. See ﬁgure 5.11 for an example of training data lying near a one-dimensional manifold embedded in tw o- dimensional space. In the context of mac hine learning, we allo w the dimensionalit y of the manifold to v ary from one p oin t to another. This often happ ens when a manifold intersects itself. F or example, a ﬁgure eight is a manifold that has a single dimension in most places but tw o dimensions at the in tersection at the center. Man y mac hine learning problems seem hop eless if we exp ect the machine learning algorithm to learn functions with in teresting v ariations across all of R n . Manifold learning algorithms surmount this obstacle by assuming that most of R n consists of inv alid inputs, and that interesting inputs o ccur only along a collection of manifolds con taining a small subset of p oints, with interesting v ariations in the output of the learned function o ccurring only along directions that lie on the manifold, or with interesting v ariations happ ening only when w e mo v e from one manifold to another. Manifold learning was introduced in the case of contin uous-v alued data and in the unsup ervised learning setting, although this probabilit y concen tration idea can b e generalized to b oth discrete data and the sup ervised learning setting: the k ey assumption remains that probabilit y mass is highly concentrated. The assumption that the data lies along a lo w-dimensional manifold may not alw a ys b e correct or useful. W e argue that in the context of AI tasks, such as those that inv olv e pro cessing images, sounds, or text, the manifold assumption is 158

HTML page 40
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS Figure 5.12: Sampling images uniformly at random (by randomly picking each pixel according to a uniform distribution) giv es rise to noisy images. Although there is a nonzero probabilit y of generating an image of a face or of any other ob ject frequently encoun tered in AI applications, we never actually observe this happ ening in practice. This suggests that the images encountered in AI applications o ccup y a negligible prop ortion of the v olume of image space. at least approximately correct. The evidence in fav or of this assumption consists of tw o categories of observ ations. The ﬁrst observ ation in fav or of the manifold h yp othesis is that the proba- 159

HTML page 41
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS bilit y distribution o ver images, text strings, and sounds that o ccur in real life is highly concentrated. Uniform noise essen tially never resembles structured inputs from these domains. Figure 5.12 shows how, instead, uniformly sampled p oints lo ok lik e the patterns of static that app ear on analog television sets when no signal is av ailable. Similarly , if y ou generate a do cument by pic king letters uniformly at random, what is the probability that you will get a meaningful English-language text? Almost zero, again, b ecause most of the long sequences of letters do not corresp ond to a natural language sequence: the distribution of natural language sequences o ccupies a very little volume in the total space of sequences of letters. Of course, concentrated probability distributions are not suﬃcien t to sho w that the data lies on a reasonably small n um b er of manifolds. W e must also establish that the examples w e encounter are connected to each other b y other examples, with eac h example surrounded by other highly similar examples that can b e reac hed b y applying transformations to trav erse the manifold. The second argument in fa v or of the manifold h yp othesis is that w e can imagine such neigh b orho o ds and transformations, at least informally . In the case of images, we can certainly think of many p ossible transformations that allow us to trace out a manifold in image space: w e can gradually dim or brigh ten the ligh ts, gradually mo v e or rotate ob jects in the image, gradually alter the colors on the surfaces of ob jects, and so forth. Multiple manifolds are likely inv olved in most applications. F or example, the manifold of h uman face images ma y not b e connected to the manifold of cat face images. These thought exp eriments conv ey some intuitiv e reasons supp orting the mani- fold h yp othesis. More rigorous exp erimen ts ( Cayton , 2005 ; Nara y anan and Mitter , 2010 ; Sc hölk opf et al. , 1998 ; Row eis and Saul , 2000 ; T enen baum et al. , 2000 ; Brand , 2003 ; Belkin and Niy ogi , 2003 ; Donoho and Grimes , 2003 ; W ein berger and Saul , 2004 ) clearly supp ort the hypothesis for a large class of datasets of interest in AI. When the data lies on a lo w-dimensional manifold, it can b e most natural for mac hine learning algorithms to represent the data in terms of co ordinates on the manifold, rather than in terms of co ordinates in R n . In everyda y life, w e can think of roads as 1-D manifolds embedded in 3-D space. W e give directions to sp eciﬁc addresses in terms of address num bers along these 1-D roads, not in terms of co ordinates in 3-D space. Extracting these manifold co ordinates is challenging but holds the promise of improving many mac hine learning algorithms. This general principle is applied in man y con texts. Figure 5.13 sho ws the manifold structure of a dataset consisting of faces. By the end of this b o ok, w e will ha v e dev elop ed the metho ds necessary to learn such a manifold structure. In ﬁgure 20.6 , we will see ho w a machine learning algorithm can successfully accomplish this goal. 160

HTML page 42
CHAPTER 5. MA CHINE LEARNING BASICS This concludes part I , which has provided the basic concepts in mathematics and machine learning that are emplo y ed throughout the remaining parts of the b o ok. Y ou are now prepared to em bark on your study of deep learning. Figure 5.13: T raining examples from the QMUL Multiview F ace Dataset ( Gong et al. , 2000 ), for which the sub jects w ere asked to mov e in such a wa y as to cov er the tw o- dimensional manifold corresp onding to tw o angles of rotation. W e w ould like learning algorithms to be able to discov er and disen tangle suc h manifold coordinates. Figure 20.6 illustrates suc h a feat. 161
