LOCATOR primary/shazeer-1701.06538v1.txt:107-180
only minor losses in computational efficiency and significantly advance the state-of-the-art results
on public language modeling and translation data sets.

1.2   O UR A PPROACH : T HE S PARSELY-G ATED M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS L AYER

Our approach to conditional computation is to introduce a new type of general purpose neural net-
work component: a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer (MoE). The MoE consists of a num-
ber of experts, each a simple feed-forward neural network, and a trainable gating network which
selects a sparse combination of the experts to process each input (see Figure 1). All parts of the
network are trained jointly by back-propagation.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017




While the introduced technique is generic, in this paper we focus on language modeling and machine
translation tasks, which are known to benefit from very large models. In particular, we apply a MoE
convolutionally between stacked LSTM layers (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), as in Figure 1.
The MoE is called once for each position in the text, selecting a potentially different combination
of experts at each position. The different experts tend to become highly specialized based on syntax
and semantics (see Appendix E Table 9). On both language modeling and machine translation
benchmarks, we improve on best published results at a fraction of the computational cost.

1.3   R ELATED WORK ON M IXTURES OF E XPERTS

Since its introduction more than two decades ago (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994),
the mixture-of-experts approach has been the subject of much research. Different types of expert
architectures hae been proposed such as SVMs (Collobert et al., 2002), Gaussian Processes (Tresp,
2001; Theis & Bethge, 2015; Deisenroth & Ng, 2015), Dirichlet Processes (Shahbaba & Neal, 2009),
and deep networks. Other work has focused on different expert configurations such as a hierarchical
structure (Yao et al., 2009), infinite numbers of experts (Rasmussen & Ghahramani, 2002), and
adding experts sequentially (Aljundi et al., 2016). Garmash & Monz (2016) suggest an ensemble
model in the format of mixture of experts for machine translation. The gating network is trained on
a pre-trained ensemble NMT model.
The works above concern top-level mixtures of experts. The mixture of experts is the whole model.
Eigen et al. (2013) introduce the idea of using multiple MoEs with their own gating networks as
parts of a deep model. It is intuitive that the latter approach is more powerful, since complex prob-
lems may contain many sub-problems each requiring different experts. They also allude in their
conclusion to the potential to introduce sparsity, turning MoEs into a vehicle for computational
computation.
Our work builds on this use of MoEs as a general purpose neural network component. While Eigen
et al. (2013) uses two stacked MoEs allowing for two sets of gating decisions, our convolutional
application of the MoE allows for different gating decisions at each position in the text. We also
realize sparse gating and demonstrate its use as a practical way to massively increase model capacity.

2     T HE S TRUCTURE OF THE M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS LAYER
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer consists of a set of n “expert networks" E1 , · · · , En , and a
“gating network" G whose output is a sparse n-dimensional vector. Figure 1 shows an overview
of the MoE module. The experts are themselves neural networks, each with their own parameters.
Although in principle we only require that the experts accept the same sized inputs and produce the
same-sized outputs, in our initial investigations in this paper, we restrict ourselves to the case where
the models are feed-forward networks with identical architectures, but with separate parameters.
Let us denote by G(x) and Ei (x) the output of the gating network and the output of the i-th expert
network for a given input x. The output y of the MoE module can be written as follows:

                                              n
                                              X
                                         y=         G(x)i Ei (x)                                    (1)
                                              i=1

We save computation based on the sparsity of the output of G(x). Wherever G(x)i = 0, we need not
compute Ei (x). In our experiments, we have up to thousands of experts, but only need to evaluate
a handful of them for every example. If the number of experts is very large, we can reduce the
branching factor by using a two-level hierarchical MoE. In a hierarchical MoE, a primary gating
network chooses a sparse weighted combination of “experts", each of which is itself a secondary
mixture-of-experts with its own gating network. In the following we focus on ordinary MoEs. We
provide more details on hierarchical MoEs in Appendix B.
Our implementation is related to other models of conditional computation. A MoE whose experts are
simple weight matrices is similar to the parameterized weight matrix proposed in (Cho & Bengio,
2014). A MoE whose experts have one hidden layer is similar to the block-wise dropout described

LOCATOR Appendix C.1, p. 14: text lines 816-823
respect to the primary gating network, so we use the formulation above.

C       1 B ILLION W ORD L ANGUAGE M ODELING B ENCHMARK - E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

C.1       8-M ILLION -O PERATIONS - PER -T IMESTEP M ODELS
Model Architecture: Our model consists of five layers: a word embedding layer, a recurrent
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) layer (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 2000), a
MoE layer, a second LSTM layer, and a softmax layer. The dimensionality of the embedding layer,
