Original source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.02531v1
Read on: 2026-10-04
Extraction: pdftotext -layout; line ranges are from that full extraction.

Extracted lines 81-110:
An obvious way to transfer the generalization ability of the cumbersome model to a small model is
to use the class probabilities produced by the cumbersome model as “soft targets” for training the
small model. For this transfer stage, we could use the same training set or a separate “transfer” set.
When the cumbersome model is a large ensemble of simpler models, we can use an arithmetic or
geometric mean of their individual predictive distributions as the soft targets. When the soft targets
have high entropy, they provide much more information per training case than hard targets and much
less variance in the gradient between training cases, so the small model can often be trained on much
less data than the original cumbersome model and using a much higher learning rate.
For tasks like MNIST in which the cumbersome model almost always produces the correct answer
with very high confidence, much of the information about the learned function resides in the ratios
of very small probabilities in the soft targets. For example, one version of a 2 may be given a
probability of 10−6 of being a 3 and 10−9 of being a 7 whereas for another version it may be the
other way around. This is valuable information that defines a rich similarity structure over the data
(i. e. it says which 2’s look like 3’s and which look like 7’s) but it has very little influence on the
cross-entropy cost function during the transfer stage because the probabilities are so close to zero.
Caruana and his collaborators circumvent this problem by using the logits (the inputs to the final
softmax) rather than the probabilities produced by the softmax as the targets for learning the small
model and they minimize the squared difference between the logits produced by the cumbersome
model and the logits produced by the small model. Our more general solution, called “distillation”,
is to raise the temperature of the final softmax until the cumbersome model produces a suitably soft
set of targets. We then use the same high temperature when training the small model to match these
soft targets. We show later that matching the logits of the cumbersome model is actually a special
case of distillation.
The transfer set that is used to train the small model could consist entirely of unlabeled data [1]
or we could use the original training set. We have found that using the original training set works
well, especially if we add a small term to the objective function that encourages the small model
to predict the true targets as well as matching the soft targets provided by the cumbersome model.
Typically, the small model cannot exactly match the soft targets and erring in the direction of the
correct answer turns out to be helpful.


Extracted lines 112-140:
2 Distillation

Neural networks typically produce class probabilities by using a “softmax” output layer that converts
the logit, zi , computed for each class into a probability, qi , by comparing zi with the other logits.

                                              exp(zi /T )
                                        qi = P                                                      (1)
                                              j exp(zj /T )


                                                   2

where T is a temperature that is normally set to 1. Using a higher value for T produces a softer
probability distribution over classes.
In the simplest form of distillation, knowledge is transferred to the distilled model by training it on
a transfer set and using a soft target distribution for each case in the transfer set that is produced by
using the cumbersome model with a high temperature in its softmax. The same high temperature is
used when training the distilled model, but after it has been trained it uses a temperature of 1.
When the correct labels are known for all or some of the transfer set, this method can be significantly
improved by also training the distilled model to produce the correct labels. One way to do this is
to use the correct labels to modify the soft targets, but we found that a better way is to simply use
a weighted average of two different objective functions. The first objective function is the cross
entropy with the soft targets and this cross entropy is computed using the same high temperature in
the softmax of the distilled model as was used for generating the soft targets from the cumbersome
model. The second objective function is the cross entropy with the correct labels. This is computed
using exactly the same logits in softmax of the distilled model but at a temperature of 1. We found
that the best results were generally obtained by using a condiderably lower weight on the second
objective function. Since the magnitudes of the gradients produced by the soft targets scale as 1/T 2
it is important to multiply them by T 2 when using both hard and soft targets. This ensures that the

