
                                     fW (xm , m, θ) = eimθ W xm ,                                  (5)

for any linear operator W . The functions fq , fk in RoPE are given by

                                         fq = fWq , fk = fWk .                                     (6)

where θd = b−2d/|D| and b = 10000. This way, RoPE associates each (complex-valued) hidden
neuron with a separate frequency θd . The benefit of doing so is that the dot product between the
query vector and the key vector only depends on the relative distance m − n.
In later discussions, a context length interpolation usually aims to modify the equation Eq. 5. To set
                                                                            ′
up a uniform convention for these discussions, note that a modification fW     can take the following
form:
                                  ′
                                 fW (xm , m, θ) = fW (xm , g(m), h(θ)),                            (7)

where g(m) is a map between real numbers and h(θ) acts on the entries of the diagonal matrix θ
uniformly by diag(h(θ1 ), · · · , h(θ|D|/2 )) according to a function h. g and h are method-dependent
functions.
In the subsequent sections, when we introduce a new interpolation method of the form Eq. 7, we only
specify the functions g(m) and h(θd ).

2.2   A DDITIONAL NOTATIONS

Given the pretrained maximal context length L, our goal is to extend it to L′ > L either with or
                                                                               ′
without finetuning. We introduce the notion of scale factor s defined by s = LL .
For the convenience of some discussions, we also introduce wavelength λd associated with the d-th
hidden dimension of RoPE as follows:


                                                 2π        2d
                                          λd =      = 2πb |D| .                                    (8)
                                                 θd

The wavelength describes the length of tokens needed in order for the rotary position embedding at
dimension d to perform a full rotation (2π).

2.3   R ELATED WORK

Position Interpolation (PI) is one of the earlier works extending context lengths of RoPE proposed by
Chen et al. (2023), and concurrently kaiokendev (2023). Under the notation of Eq. 7, it is setting

                                       g(m) = s · m, h(θ) = θ,                                     (9)
                             ′
where s is the scale factor LL . We include some details in Appendix A.1.
ReRoPE (Su, 2023) also aims to extend the context size of existing models pre-trained with RoPE,
and claims "infinite" context length without needing any fine-tuning. This claim is backed by a
monotonically decreasing loss with increasing context length up to 16k on the Llama 2 13B model. It
achieves context extension by modifying the attention mechanism and thus is not purely an embedding
interpolation method. Since it is currently not compatible with Flash Attention 2 (Dao, 2023) and
