3     M ETHODOLOGY

Whereas PI stretches all RoPE dimensions equally, we find that the theoretical interpolation bound
described by PI (Chen et al., 2023) is insufficient at predicting the complex dynamics between RoPE
and the LLM’s internal embeddings. In the following subsections, we describe the main issues
with PI we have individually identified and solved, so as to give the readers the context, origin and
justifications of each method which we use in concert to obtain the full YaRN method.

3.1   L OSS OF H IGH F REQUENCY INFORMATION - "NTK- AWARE " INTERPOLATION

If we look at rotary position embeddings (RoPE) only from an information encoding perspective,
it was shown in (Tancik et al., 2020), using Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory, that deep neural
networks have trouble learning high frequency information if the input dimension is low and the
corresponding embeddings lack high frequency components. Here we can see the similarities: a
token’s positional information is one-dimensional, and RoPE expands it to an n-dimensional complex
vector embedding. RoPE closely resembles Fourier Features (Tancik et al., 2020) in many aspects, as
it is possible to define RoPE as a special 1D case of a Fourier Feature.
In the case of Positional Interpolation (PI), as we strech all dimensions equally by a factor s, it
removes the high frequency components of RoPE. This degradation is worsened as the scaling factor
s grows, and at some point, the network will not be able to recover. Previous fine-tunes (kaiokendev,
2023) (Chen et al., 2023) (Together.ai, 2023) (Quesnelle et al., 2023) using PI were only able to
achieve a scaling factor of roughly s = 8 before the LLM’s outputs starts to degrade, even after
fine-tuning.
In order to alleviate this issue, the "NTK-aware" interpolation was developed in (bloc97, 2023a).
Instead of scaling every dimension of RoPE equally by a factor s, we spread out the interpolation
pressure across multiple dimensions by scaling high frequencies less and low frequencies more. One
can obtain such a transformation in many ways, but the simplest would be to perform a base change
on the value of θ. The details are described in the Appendix A.2 and the method has seen some
open-source adoptions* .
One main issue of this "NTK-aware" scaling is that it is very difficult to determine what optimal base
should be used for an intended context extension by s times. The best base to use for "NTK-aware"
interpolation usually has to be found empirically, which significantly increases the difficulty and
cost of obtaining a successful fine-tuned model. Despite its limitations, the observations from the
NTK theory is valid and the following idea is still maintained and executed in a different way in the
"NTK-by-parts" interpolation introduced in the next section.

3.2   L OSS OF R ELATIVE L OCAL D ISTANCES - "NTK- BY- PARTS " INTERPOLATION

To understand why "NTK-aware" interpolation works better than PI and to eliminate its disadvantages,
we have to take a closer look at RoPE. In this section, we think heavily in terms of the wavelengths
λd defined in Eq. 8 in the formula of RoPE. For simplicity, we omit the subscript d in λd and the
reader is encouraged to think about λ as the wavelength of an arbitrary periodic function.
In theory, as RoPE is a relative position embedding, it should be quite surprising that it fails to
generalize to unseen longer context sizes. However, we can show that in practice, RoPE does not
only encode relative position. One observation we can make is that given a context size L, there are
some dimensions d where the wavelength is longer than the maximum context length seen during
pretraining (λ > L), this suggests that some dimensions’ rotary embeddings might not be distributed
evenly in the rotational domain (i.e. does not perform a full rotation for the entire training context
size). In such cases, we presume having unique position pairs† implies that the absolute positional

   *We note that shortly before the release of this article, Code Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) was released

and uses "NTK-aware" scaling by manually scaling the base b to 1M, in which they call this method as RoPE
"adjusted base frequency" (ABF).
   †
     Since the dimension never rotates fully at least once during pre-training, if we pick the first token as the
anchor, every other token during pre-training has an unique distance to it, which the neural network can use to
determine its absolute position.


                                                       4
information remains intact in those dimensions. On the contrary, when the wavelength is short, only
relative positional information is accessible to the network.
Given these observations, we can see that it is important to not touch the dimensions that only encode
relative positional information, as they are crucial for the network to distinguish the relative order
of nearby tokens. Meanwhile, dimensions that only encode absolute positional information should
always be interpolated, as larger distances will be out of distribution. Instead of arbitrarily changing
the base in "NTK-aware" interpolation (which basically does something similar to what is described
here), we can formulate an explicit and targeted interpolation method that takes in account all of the
above.
In other words,

       • if the wavelength λ is much smaller than the context size L, we do not interpolate;
       • if the wavelength λ is equal to or bigger than the context size L, we want to only interpolate
         and avoid any extrapolation (unlike the previous "NTK-aware" method);
       • dimensions in-between can have a bit of both, similar to the "NTK-aware" interpolation.

As a result, it is more convenient to introduce the ratio r = Lλ between the original context size L and
the wavelength λ. This ratio represents the number of rotations a certain RoPE dimension makes
given a fixed pretrained context length L. In the d-th hidden state, the ratio r depends on d in the
following way:
                                                  L         L
                                          r(d) =      =       2d .                                  (10)
                                                  λd     2πb |D|
In order to define the boundary of the different interpolation strategies as above, we introduce
two extra parameters α, β. All hidden dimensions d where r(d) < α are those where we linearly
interpolate by a scale s (exactly like PI, avoiding any extrapolation), and the d where r(d) > β are
those where we do not interpolate at all. Define the ramp function γ to be
                                            
                                            
                                             0,        if r < α
                                            
                                    γ(r) = 1,           if r > β                                (11)
                                               r−α
                                                     , otherwise.
                                            
                                            
                                               β−α
                                            

With the help of the ramp function, the "NTK-by-parts" method can be described as follows.

Definition 1 The "NTK-by-parts" interpolation is a modification of RoPE using Eq. 7 with the
following functions‡ .
                              g(m) = m                                                             (12)
                                                 θ d         
                              h(θd ) = 1 − γ r(d)       + γ r(d) θd .                              (13)
                                                    s

The values of α and β should be tuned on a case-by-case basis. For example, we have found
experimentally that for the Llama family of models, good values for α and β are α = 1 and β = 32.
Using the techniques described in this section, a variant of the resulting method was released under
the name "NTK-by-parts" interpolation (bloc97, 2023b). This improved method performs better
than the previous PI (Chen et al., 2023) and "NTK-aware" 3.1 interpolation methods, both with
non-fine-tuned models and with fine-tuned models, as shown in (bloc97, 2023b) and Section 4.2.

3.3   YA RN
