Original source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.06538v1
Read on: 2026-10-04
Extraction: pdftotext -layout; line ranges are from that full extraction.

Extracted lines 152-175:
et al. (2013) uses two stacked MoEs allowing for two sets of gating decisions, our convolutional
application of the MoE allows for different gating decisions at each position in the text. We also
realize sparse gating and demonstrate its use as a practical way to massively increase model capacity.

2     T HE S TRUCTURE OF THE M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS LAYER
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer consists of a set of n “expert networks" E1 , · · · , En , and a
“gating network" G whose output is a sparse n-dimensional vector. Figure 1 shows an overview
of the MoE module. The experts are themselves neural networks, each with their own parameters.
Although in principle we only require that the experts accept the same sized inputs and produce the
same-sized outputs, in our initial investigations in this paper, we restrict ourselves to the case where
the models are feed-forward networks with identical architectures, but with separate parameters.
Let us denote by G(x) and Ei (x) the output of the gating network and the output of the i-th expert
network for a given input x. The output y of the MoE module can be written as follows:

                                              n
                                              X
                                         y=         G(x)i Ei (x)                                    (1)
                                              i=1

We save computation based on the sparsity of the output of G(x). Wherever G(x)i = 0, we need not
compute Ei (x). In our experiments, we have up to thousands of experts, but only need to evaluate
a handful of them for every example. If the number of experts is very large, we can reduce the
branching factor by using a two-level hierarchical MoE. In a hierarchical MoE, a primary gating
network chooses a sparse weighted combination of “experts", each of which is itself a secondary

Extracted lines 222-260:

3     A DDRESSING P ERFORMANCE C HALLENGES
3.1   T HE S HRINKING BATCH P ROBLEM

On modern CPUs and GPUs, large batch sizes are necessary for computational efficiency, so as
to amortize the overhead of parameter loads and updates. If the gating network chooses k out of
n experts for each example, then for a batch of b examples, each expert receives a much smaller
batch of approximately kb n 
 b examples. This causes a naive MoE implementation to become
very inefficient as the number of experts increases. The solution to this shrinking batch problem is
to make the original batch size as large as possible. However, batch size tends to be limited by the
memory necessary to store activations between the forwards and backwards passes. We propose the
following techniques for increasing the batch size:

Mixing Data Parallelism and Model Parallelism: In a conventional distributed training setting,
multiple copies of the model on different devices asynchronously process distinct batches of data,
and parameters are synchronized through a set of parameter servers. In our technique, these different
batches run synchronously so that they can be combined for the MoE layer. We distribute the
standard layers of the model and the gating network according to conventional data-parallel schemes,
but keep only one shared copy of each expert. Each expert in the MoE layer receives a combined
batch consisting of the relevant examples from all of the data-parallel input batches. The same set
of devices function as data-parallel replicas (for the standard layers and the gating networks) and
as model-parallel shards (each hosting a subset of the experts). If the model is distributed over d
devices, and each device processes a batch of size b, each expert receives a batch of approximately
kbd
 n examples. Thus, we achieve a factor of d improvement in expert batch size.
In the case of a hierarchical MoE (Section B), the primary gating network employs data parallelism,
and the secondary MoEs employ model parallelism. Each secondary MoE resides on one device.


                                                   4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017




This technique allows us to increase the number of experts (and hence the number of parameters) by
proportionally increasing the number of devices in the training cluster. The total batch size increases,

