2.1        Sparse Mixture of Experts                                                n_kv_heads               8
We present a brief overview of the Mixture of Experts layer (Figure 1).             context_len          32768
For a more in-depth overview, see [12]. The output of the MoE module                vocab_size           32000
for a given input x is determined by the weighted sum of the outputs                num_experts              8
of the expert networks, where the weights are given by the gating                   top_k_experts            2
network’s output. i.e. given n expert networks {E0 , Ei , ..., En−1 }, the Table 1: Model architecture.
output of the expert layer is given by:
                                         n−1
                                          X
                                             G(x)i · Ei (x).
                                              i=0

Here, G(x)i denotes the n-dimensional output of the gating network for the i-th expert, and Ei (x)
is the output of the i-th expert network. If the gating vector is sparse, we can avoid computing
the outputs of experts whose gates are zero. There are multiple alternative ways of implementing
G(x) [6, 15, 35], but a simple and performant one is implemented by taking the softmax over the
Top-K logits of a linear layer [28]. We use
                                 G(x) := Softmax(TopK(x · Wg )),
where (TopK(ℓ))i := ℓi if ℓi is among the top-K coordinates of logits ℓ ∈ Rn and (TopK(ℓ))i := −∞
otherwise. The value of K – the number of experts used per token – is a hyper-parameter that modu-
lates the amount of compute used to process each token. If one increases n while keeping K fixed, one
      1
          https://mistral.ai/news/mixtral-of-experts/


                                                        2
can increase the model’s parameter count while keeping its computational cost effectively constant.
This motivates a distinction between the model’s total parameter count (commonly referenced as the
sparse parameter count), which grows with n, and the number of parameters used for processing an
individual token (called the active parameter count), which grows with K up to n.
MoE layers can be run efficiently on single GPUs with high performance specialized kernels. For
example, Megablocks [13] casts the feed-forward network (FFN) operations of the MoE layer as large
sparse matrix multiplications, significantly enhancing the execution speed and naturally handling
cases where different experts get a variable number of tokens assigned to them. Moreover, the
MoE layer can be distributed to multiple GPUs through standard Model Parallelism techniques, and
through a particular kind of partitioning strategy called Expert Parallelism (EP) [28]. During the MoE
layer’s execution, tokens meant to be processed by a specific expert are routed to the corresponding
GPU for processing, and the expert’s output is returned to the original token location. Note that EP
introduces challenges in load balancing, as it is essential to distribute the workload evenly across the
GPUs to prevent overloading individual GPUs or hitting computational bottlenecks.
In a Transformer model, the MoE layer is applied independently per token and replaces the
feed-forward (FFN) sub-block of the transformer block. For Mixtral we use the same SwiGLU
architecture as the expert function Ei (x) and set K = 2. This means each token is routed to two
SwiGLU sub-blocks with different sets of weights. Taking this all together, the output y for an input
token x is computed as:
                                 n−1
                                 X
                           y=          Softmax(Top2(x · Wg ))i · SwiGLUi (x).
                                 i=0

This formulation is similar to the GShard architecture [21], with the exceptions that we replace all
FFN sub-blocks by MoE layers while GShard replaces every other block, and that GShard uses a
more elaborate gating strategy for the second expert assigned to each token.
