                                             Estimating or Propagating Gradients Through
                                            Stochastic Neurons for Conditional Computation


                                                             Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard and Aaron Courville
                                                              Département d’informatique et recherche opérationnelle
arXiv:1308.3432v1 [cs.LG] 15 Aug 2013




                                                                              Université de Montréal


                                                                                     Abstract
                                                 Stochastic neurons and hard non-linearities can be useful for a number of rea-
                                                 sons in deep learning models, but in many cases they pose a challenging problem:
                                                 how to estimate the gradient of a loss function with respect to the input of such
                                                 stochastic or non-smooth neurons? I.e., can we “back-propagate” through these
                                                 stochastic neurons? We examine this question, existing approaches, and compare
                                                 four families of solutions, applicable in different settings. One of them is the min-
                                                 imum variance unbiased gradient estimator for stochatic binary neurons (a special
                                                 case of the REINFORCE algorithm). A second approach, introduced here, de-
                                                 composes the operation of a binary stochastic neuron into a stochastic binary part
                                                 and a smooth differentiable part, which approximates the expected effect of the
                                                 pure stochatic binary neuron to first order. A third approach involves the injec-
                                                 tion of additive or multiplicative noise in a computational graph that is otherwise
                                                 differentiable. A fourth approach heuristically copies the gradient with respect
                                                 to the stochastic output directly as an estimator of the gradient with respect to
                                                 the sigmoid argument (we call this the straight-through estimator). To explore a
                                                 context where these estimators are useful, we consider a small-scale version of
                                                 conditional computation, where sparse stochastic units form a distributed repre-
                                                 sentation of gaters that can turn off in combinatorially many ways large chunks
                                                 of the computation performed in the rest of the neural network. In this case, it is
                                                 important that the gating units produce an actual 0 most of the time. The resulting
                                                 sparsity can be potentially be exploited to greatly reduce the computational cost
                                                 of large deep networks for which conditional computation would be useful.

                                        1   Introduction and Background
                                        Many learning algorithms and in particular those based on neural networks or deep learning rely
                                        on gradient-based learning. To compute exact gradients, it is better if the relationship between
                                        parameters and the training objective is continuous and generally smooth. If it is only constant by
                                        parts, i.e., mostly flat, then gradient-based learning is impractical. This was what motivated the move
                                        from neural networks based on so-called formal neurons, with a hard threshold output, to neural
                                        networks whose units are based on a sigmoidal non-linearity, and the well-known back-propagation
                                        algorithm to compute the gradients (Rumelhart et al., 1986).
                                        We call the computational graph or flow graph the graph that relates inputs and parameters to outputs
                                        and training criterion. Although it had been taken for granted by most researchers that smoothness of
                                        this graph was a necessary condition for exact gradient-based training methods to work well, recent
                                        successes of deep networks with rectifiers and other “non-smooth” non-linearities (Glorot et al.,
                                        2011; Krizhevsky et al., 2012a; Goodfellow et al., 2013) clearly question that belief: see Section 2
                                        for a deeper discussion.
                                        In principle, even if there are hard decisions (such as the treshold function typically found in for-
                                        mal neurons) in the computational graph, it is possible to obtain estimated gradients by introducing
                                        perturbations in the system and observing the effects. Although finite-difference approximations of


                                                                                          1
the gradient appear hopelessly inefficient (because independently perturbing each of N parameters
to estimate its gradient would be N times more expensive than ordinary back-propagation), another
option is to introduce random perturbations, and this idea has been pushed far (and experimented
on neural networks for control) by Spall (1992) with the Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Ap-
proximation (SPSA) algorithm.
As discussed here (Section 2), non-smooth non-linearities and stochastic perturbations can be com-
bined to obtain reasonably low-variance estimators of the gradient, and a good example of that
success is with the recent advances with dropout (Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012b;
Goodfellow et al., 2013). The idea is to multiply the output of a non-linear unit by independent
binomial noise. This noise injection is useful as a regularizer and it does slow down training a bit,
but not apparently by a lot (maybe 2-fold), which is very encouraging. The symmetry-breaking
and induced sparsity may also compensate for the extra variance and possibly help to reduce ill-
conditioning, as hypothesized by Bengio (2013).
However, it is appealing to consider noise whose amplitude can be modulated by the signals com-
puted in the computational graph, such as with stochastic binary neurons, which output a 1 or a 0
according to a sigmoid probability. Short of computing an average over an exponential number of
configurations, it would seem that computing the exact gradient (with respect to the average of the
loss over all possible binary samplings of all the stochastic neurons in the neural network) is im-
possible in such neural networks. The question is whether good estimators (which might have bias
and variance) or similar alternatives can be computed and yield effective training. We discuss and
compare here four reasonable solutions to this problem, present theoretical results about them, and
small-scale experiments to validate that training can be effective, in the context where one wants
to use such stochastic units to gate computation. The motivation, described further below, is to
exploit such sparse stochastic gating units for conditional computation, i.e., avoiding to visit every
parameter for every example, thus allowing to train potentially much larger models for the same
computational cost.

1.1        More Motivations and Conditional Computation
One motivation for studying stochastic neurons is that stochastic behavior may be a required ingre-
dient in modeling biological neurons. The apparent noise in neuronal spike trains could come from
an actual noise source or simply from the hard to reproduce changes in the set of input spikes enter-
ing a neuron’s dendrites. Until this question is resolved by biological observations, it is interesting
to study how such noise – which has motivated the Boltzmann machine (Hinton et al., 1984) – may
impact computation and learning in neural networks.
Stochastic neurons with binary outputs are also interesting because they can easily give rise to sparse
representations (that have many zeros), a form of regularization that has been used in many repre-
sentation learning algorithms (Bengio et al., 2013). Sparsity of the representation corresponds to the
prior that, for a given input scene, most of the explanatory factors are irrelevant (and that would be
represented by many zeros in the representation).
As argued by Bengio (2013), sparse representations may be a useful ingredient of conditional com-
putation, by which only a small subset of the model parameters are “activated” (and need to be
visited) for any particular example, thereby greatly reducing the number of computations needed
per example. Sparse gating units may be trained to select which part of the model actually need to
be computed for a given example.
Binary representations are also useful as keys for a hash table, as in the semantic hashing algo-
rithm (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009). Trainable stochastic neurons would also be useful inside
recurrent networks to take hard stochastic decisions about temporal events at different time scales.
This would be useful to train multi-scale temporal hierarchies 1 such that back-propagated gradients
could quickly flow through the slower time scales. Multi-scale temporal hierarchies for recurrent
nets have already been proposed and involved exponential moving averages of different time con-
stants (El Hihi and Bengio, 1996), where each unit is still updated after each time step. Instead,
identifying key events at a high level of abstraction would allow these high-level units to only be
updated when needed (asynchronously), creating a fast track (short path) for gradient propagation
through time.
      1
          Daan Wierstra, personal communication


                                                  2
1.2 Prior Work
The idea of having stochastic neuron models is of course very old, with one of the major family of
algorithms relying on such neurons being the Boltzmann machine (Hinton et al., 1984). Another
biologically motivated proposal for synaptic strength learning was proposed by Fiete and Seung
(2006). It is based on small zero-mean i.i.d. perturbations applied at each stochastic neuron potential
(prior to a non-linearity) and a Taylor expansion of the expected reward as a function of these
variations. Fiete and Seung (2006) end up proposing a gradient estimator that looks like a correlation
between the reward and the perturbation, very similar to that presented in Section 3, and which is a
special case of the REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) algorithm. However, unlike REINFORCE, their
estimator is only unbiased in the limit of small perturbations.
Gradient estimators based on stochastic perturbations have long been shown to be much more effi-
cient than standard finite-difference approximations (Spall, 1992). Consider N quantities ui to be
adjusted in order to minimize an expected loss L(u). A finite difference approximation is based on
measuring separately the effect of changing each one of the parameters, e.g., through L(u)−L(u−e    
                                                                                                           i)
                                                                                                              ,
                         L(u+ei )−L(u−ei )
or even better, through           2         , where ei = (0, 0, · · · , 1, 0, 0, · · · , 0) where the 1 is at
position i. With N quantities (and typically O(N ) computations to calculate L(u)), the compu-
tational cost of the gradient estimator is O(N 2 ). Instead, a perturbation-based estimator such as
found in Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) (Spall, 1992) chooses a ran-
dom perturbation vector z (e.g., isotropic Gaussian noise of variance σ 2 ) and estimates the gradient
of the expected loss with respect to ui through L(u+z)−L(u−z)
                                                       2zi      . So long as the perturbation does not
put too much probability around 0, this estimator is as efficient as the finite-difference estimator but
requires O(N ) less computation. However, like the algorithm proposed by Fiete and Seung (2006)
this estimator becomes unbiased only as the perturbations go towards 0. When we want to consider
all-or-none perturbations (like a neuron sending a spike or not), it is not clear if these assumptions
are appropriate. An advantage of the approaches proposed here is that they do not require that the
perturbations be small to be valid.

2    Non-Smooth Stochastic Neurons
One way to achieve gradient-based learning in networks of stochastic neurons is to build an archi-
tecture in which noise is injected so that gradients can sometimes flow into the neuron and can then
adjust it (and its predecessors in the computational graph) appropriately.
In general, we can consider the output hi of a stochastic neuron as the application of a deterministic
function that depends on some noise source zi and on some differentiable transformation ai of its
inputs (typically, a vector containing the outputs of other neurons) and internal parameters (typically
the bias and incoming weights of the neuron):
                                               hi = f (ai , zi )                                           (1)
So long as f (ai , zi ) in the above equation has a non-zero gradient with respect to ai , gradient-based
learning (with back-propagation to compute
                                         P       gradients) can proceed. In this paper, we consider the
usual affine transformation ai = bi + j Wij xij , where xi is the vector of inputs into neuron i.
For example, if the noise zi is added or multiplied somewhere in the computation of hi , gradients
can be computed as usual. Dropout noise (Hinton et al., 2012) and masking noise (in denoising
auto-encoders (Vincent et al., 2008)) is multiplied (just after the neuron non-linearity), while in
semantic hashing (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009) noise is added (just before the non-linearity).
For example, that noise can be binomial (dropout, masking noise) or Gaussian (semantic hashing).
However, if we want hi to be binary (like in stochastic binary neurons), then f will have derivatives
that are 0 almost everywhere (and infinite at the threshold), so that gradients can never flow.
There is an intermediate option that we put forward here: choose f so that it has two main kinds of
behavior, with zero derivatives in some regions, and with significantly non-zero derivatives in other
regions. We call these two states of the neuron respectively the insensitive state and the sensitive
state.
2.1 Noisy Rectifier
A special case is when the insensitive state corresponds to hi = 0 and we have sparsely activated
neurons. The prototypical example of that situation is the rectifier unit (Nair and Hinton, 2010;


                                                      3
Glorot et al., 2011), whose non-linearity is simply max(0, arg), i.e.,
                                       hi = max(0, zi + ai )
where zi is a zero-mean noise. Although in practice Gaussian noise is appropriate, interesting prop-
erties can be shown for zi sampled from the logistic density p(z) = sigm(z)(1 − sigm(z)), where
sigm(·) represents the logistic sigmoid function.
In that case, we can prove nice properties of the noisy rectifier.
Proposition 1. The noisy rectifier with logistic noise has the following properties: (a) P (hi > 0) =
sigm(ai ), (b) E[hi ] = s+ (ai ), where s+ (x) = log(1 + exp(x)) is the softplus function and the
random variable is zi (given a fixed ai ).

Proof.
                       P (hi > 0)    =P (zi > −ai ) = 1 − sigm(−ai )
                                              1           1
                                 = 1−              =             = sigm(ai )
                                           1 + eai     1 + e−ai
which proves (a). For (b), we use the facts d sigm(x)
                                                dx     = sigm(x)(1 − sigm(x)), s+ (u) → u as
u → ∞, change of variable x = ai + zi and integrate by parts:
                                  Z t
                 E[hi ] = lim              (ai + zi )sigm(zi )(1 − sigm(zi )dzi
                                 t→∞     zi >−ai
                                                                 Z t                
                                                           t
                            =    lim       [x sigm(x − ai )]0 −         sigm(x − a)dx
                                 t→∞                               0
                                                                           t
                            =    lim [x sigm(x − ai ) − s+ (x − ai )]0
                                 t→∞
                            = ai + s+ (−ai ) = s+ (ai )


Let us now consider two cases:
      1. If f (ai , 0) > 0, the basic state is active, the unit is generally sensitive and non-zero, but
         sometimes it is shut off (e.g., when zi is sufficiently negative to push the argument of the
         rectifier below 0). In that case gradients will flow in most cases (samples of zi ). If the rest
         of the system sends the signal that hi should have been smaller, then gradients will push it
         towards being more often in the insensitive state.
      2. If f (ai , 0) = 0, the basic state is inactive, the unit is generally insensitive and zero, but
         sometimes turned on (e.g., when zi is sufficiently positive to push the argument of the
         rectifier above 0). In that case gradients will not flow in most cases, but when they do,
         the signal will either push the weighted sum lower (if being active was not actually a good
         thing for that unit in that context) and reduce the chances of being active again, or it will
         push the weight sum higher (if being active was actually a good thing for that unit in that
         context) and increase the chances of being active again.
So it appears that even though the gradient does not always flow (as it would with sigmoid or tanh
units), it might flow sufficiently often to provide the appropriate training information. The important
thing to notice is that even when the basic state (second case, above) is for the unit to be insensitive
and zero, there will be an occasional gradient signal that can draw it out of there.
One concern with this approach is that one can see an asymmetry between the number of times that
a unit with an active state can get a chance to receive a signal telling it to become inactive, versus
the number of times that a unit with an inactive state can get a signal telling it to become active.
Another potential and related concern is that some of these units will “die” (become useless) if their
basic state is inactive in the vast majority of cases (for example, because their weights pushed them
into that regime due to random fluctations). Because of the above asymmetry, dead units would stay
dead for very long before getting a chance of being born again, while live units would sometimes get
into the death zone by chance and then get stuck there. What we propose here is a simple mechanism
to adjust the bias of each unit so that in average its “firing rate” (fraction of the time spent in the
active state) reaches some pre-defined target. For example, if the moving average of being non-zero
falls below a threshold, the bias is pushed up until that average comes back above the threshold.

                                                     4
2.2 STS Units: Stochastic Times Smooth
We propose here a novel form of stochastic unit that is related to the noisy rectifier and to the
stochastic binary unit, but that can be trained by ordinary gradient descent with the gradient obtained
by back-propagation in a computational graph. We call it the STS unit (Stochastic Times Smooth).
With ai the activation before the stochastic non-linearity, the output of the STS unit is
                                         pi = sigm(ai )
                                                        √
                                         bi ∼ Binomial( pi )
                                                √
                                         hi = bi pi                                                      (2)

            p The STS unit benefits from the following properties: (a) E[hi ] = pi , (b)
Proposition 2.
P (hi > 0) = sigm(ai ), (c) for any differentiable function f of hi , we have
                                                          √
                                 E[f (hi )] = f (pi ) + o( pi )
as pi → 0, and where the expectations and probability are over the injected noise bi , given ai .

Proof. Statements (a) and (b) are immediately
                                         √ derived from the definitions in Eq. 2 by noting that
E[bi ] = P (bi > 0) = P (hi > 0) = pi . Statement (c) is obtained by first writing out the
expectation,                            √      √             √
                            E[f (hi )] = pi f ( pi ) + (1 − pi )f (0)
and then performing a Taylor expansion of f around pi as pi → 0):
                        √                           √              √
                     f ( pi ) = f (pi ) + f 0 (pi )( pi − pi ) + o( pi − pi )
                        f (0) = f (pi ) + f 0 (pi )(−pi ) + o(pi )

where o(x)
         x → 0 as x → 0, so we obtain
                 √                         √                    √                                 √
E[f (hi )] =       pi (f (pi ) + f 0 (pi )( pi − pi )) + (1 − pi )(f (pi ) + f 0 (pi )(−pi )) + o( pi )
                 √                               √                  √                         √         √
            =      pi f (pi ) + f 0 (pi )(pi − pi pi ) + f (pi )(1 − pi ) − f 0 (pi )(pi − pi pi ) + o( pi )
                              √
            = f (pi ) + o( pi )
                   √                                            √
using the fact that pi > pi , o(pi ) can be replaced by o( pi ).
                                                                                            √
Note that this derivation can be generalized to an expansion around f (x) for any x ≤           pi , yielding
                                                                      √
                            E[f (hi )] = f (x) + (x − pi )f 0 (x) + o( pi )
where the effect of the first derivative is canceled out when we choose x = pi . It is also a reasonable
choice to expand around pi because E[hi ] = pi .

3   Unbiased Estimator of Gradient for Stochastic Binary Neurons
The above proposals cannot deal with non-linearities like the indicator function that have a derivative
of 0 almost everywhere. Let us consider this case now, where we want some component of our model
to take a hard binary decision but allow this decision to be stochastic, with a probability that is a
continuous function of some quantities, through parameters that we wish to learn. We will also
assume that many such decisions can be taken in parallel with independent noise sources zi driving
the stochastic samples. Without loss of generality, we consider here a set of binary decisions, i.e.,
the setup corresponds to having a set of stochastic binary neurons, whose output hi influences an
observed future loss L. In the framework of Eq. 1, we could have for example
                                     hi = f (ai , zi ) = 1zi >sigm(ai )                                  (3)
where zi ∼ U [0, 1] is uniform and sigm(u) = 1/(1 + exp(−u)) is the sigmoid function. We would
ideally like to estimate how a change in ai would impact L in average over the noise sources, so as
to be able to propagate this estimated gradients into parameters and inputs of the stochastic neuron.
Theorem 1. Let hi be defined as in Eq. 3, with L = L(hi , ci , c−i ) a loss that depends stochas-
tically on hi , ci the noise sources that influence ai , and c−i those that do not influence ai , then
                                                                   ∂Ez ,c
                                                                    i −i
                                                                            [L|ci ]
ĝi = (hi − sigm(ai )) × L is an unbiased estimator of gi =           ∂ai      where the expectation is
over zi and c−i , conditioned on the set of noise sources ci that influence ai .

                                                     5
Proof. We will compute the expected value of the estimator and verify that it equals the desired
derivative. The set of all noise sources in the system is {zi } ∪ ci ∪ c−i . We can consider L to be an
implicit deterministic function of all the noise sources (zi , ci , c−i ), Evz [·] denotes the expectation
over variable vz , while E[·|vz ] denotes the expectation over all the other random variables besides
vz , i.e., conditioned on vZ .
                 E[L|ci ] = Ec−i [Ezi [L(hi , ci , c−i )]]
                            = Ec−i [Ezi [hi L(1, ci , c−i ) + (1 − hi )L(0, ci , c−i )]]
                            = Ec−i [P (hi = 1|ai )L(1, ci , c−i ) + P (hi = 0|ai )L(0, ci , c−i )]
                            = Ec−i [sigm(ai )L(1, ci , c−i ) + (1 − sigm(ai ))L(0, ci , c−i )]            (4)
Since ai does not influence P (c−i ), differentiating with respect to ai gives
            def ∂E[L|ci ]              ∂sigm(ai )                   ∂sigm(ai )
         gi =                  = Ec−i [           L(1, ci , c−i ) −            L(0, ci , c−i )|ci ]
                      ∂ai                 ∂ai                          ∂ai
                               = Ec−i [sigm(ai )(1 − sigm(ai ))(L(1, ci , c−i ) − L(0, ci , c−i )|ci ]    (5)
First consider that since hi ∈ {0, 1},
                            L(hi , ci , c−i ) = hi L(1, ci , c−i ) + (1 − hi )L(0, ci , c−i )
h2i = hi and hi (1 − hi ) = 0, so
           def
        ĝi = (hi − sigm(ai ))L(hi , ci , c−i ) = hi (hi − sigm(ai ))L(1, ci , c−i )                      (6)
                                                       + (hi − sigm(ai ))(1 − hi )L(0, ci , c−i ))
                                                = hi (1 − sigm(ai ))L(1, ci , c−i )                       (7)
                                                       − (1 − hi )sigm(ai )L(0, ci , c−i ).               (8)
Now let us consider the expected value of the estimator ĝi = (hi − sigm(ai ))L(hi , ci , c−i ).
 llE[ĝi ] = E[hi (1 − sigm(ai ))L(1, ci , c−i ) − (1 − hi )sigm(ai )L(0, ci , c−i )]
           = Eci ,c−i [sigm(ai )(1 − sigm(ai ))L(1, ci , c−i ) − (1 − sigm(ai ))sigm(ai )L(0, ci , c−i )]
         = Eci ,c−i [sigm(ai )(1 − sigm(ai ))(L(1, ci , c−i ) − L(0, ci , c−i ))]                         (9)
which is the same as Eq. 5, i.e., the expected value of the estimator equals the gradient of the
expected loss, E[ĝi ] = gi .

This estimator is a special case of the REINFORCE algorithm when the stochastic unit is a Bernoulli
with probability given by a sigmoid (Williams, 1992). In the REINFORCE paper, Williams shows
that if the stochastic action h is sampled with probability pθ (h) and yields a reward R, then
                                               ∂ log pθ (h)      ∂Eh [R]
                                      Eh [(R − b) ·          ]=
                                                     ∂θ            ∂θ
where b is an arbitrary constant, i.e., the sampled value h can be seen as a weighted maximum
likelihood target for the output distribution pθ (·), with the weights R − b proportional to the reward.
The additive normalization constant b does not change the expected gradient, but influences its
variance, and an optimal choice can be computed, as shown below.
Corollary 1. Under the same conditions as Theorem 1, and for any (possibly unit-specific) con-
stant L̄i the centered estimator (hi − sigm(ai ))(L − L̄i ), is also an unbiased estimator of gi =
∂Ezi ,c−i [L|ci ]
      ∂ai         . Furthermore, among all possible values of L̄i , the minimum variance choice is

                                                   E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L]
                                           L̄i =                          ,                              (10)
                                                   E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 ]
which we note is a weighted average of the loss values L, whose weights are specific to unit i.

Proof. The centered estimator (hi − sigm(ai ))(L − L̄i ) can be decomposed into the sum of the
uncentered estimator ĝi and the term (hi − sigm(ai ))L̄i . Since Ezi [hi |ai ] = sigm(ai ), E[L̄i (hi −
sigm(ai ))|ai ] = 0, so that the expected value of the centered estimator equals the expected value


                                                           6
of the uncentered estimator. By Theorem 1 (the uncentered estimator is unbiased), the centered
estimator is therefore also unbiased, which completes the proof of the first statement.
Regarding the optimal choice of L̄i , first note that the variance of the uncentered estimator is
                     V ar[(hi − sigm(ai ))L] = E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L2 ] − E[ĝi ]2 .
Now let us compute the variance of the centered estimator:
    V ar[(hi − sigm(ai ))(L − L̄i )] = E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 (L − L̄i )2 ] − E[(hi − σ(ai ))(L − L̄i )]2
                                     = E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L2 ] + E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L̄2i ]
                                    − 2E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 LL̄i ] − (E[ĝi ] − 0)2
                                    = V ar[(hi − sigm(ai ))L] − ∆                                      (11)

where ∆ = 2E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 LL̄i ] − E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L̄2i ]. Let us rewrite ∆:

                       ∆ = 2E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 LL̄i ] − E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L̄2i ]
                         = E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L̄i (2L − L̄i )]
                         = E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 (L2 − (L − L̄i )2 )]                                    (12)

∆ is maximized (to minimize variance of the estimator) when E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 (L − L̄i )2 ] is
minimized. Taking the derivative of that expression with respect to L̄i , we obtain
                                2E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 (L̄i − L)] = 0
which, as claimed, is achieved for
                                             E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 L]
                                     L̄i =                          .
                                             E[(hi − sigm(ai ))2 ]

Note that a general formula for the lowest variance estimator for REINFORCE (Williams, 1992)
had already been introduced in the reinforcement learning context by Weaver and Tao (2001), which
includes the above result as a special case. This followed from previous work (Dayan, 1990) for the
case of binary immediate reward.
Practically, we could get the lowest variance estimator (among all choices of the L̄i ) by keeping track
of two numbers (running or moving averages) for each stochastic neuron, one for the numerator and
one for the denominator of the unit-specific L̄i in Eq. 10. This would lead the lowest-variance
estimator (hi − sigm(ai ))(L − L̄i ). Note how the unbiased estimator only requires broadcasting L
throughout the network, no back-propagation and only local computation. Note also how this could
be applied even with an estimate of future rewards or losses L, as would be useful in the context
of reinforcement learning (where the actual loss or reward will be measured farther into the future,
much after hi has been sampled).


4     Straight-Through Estimator

Another estimator of the expected gradient through stochastic neurons was proposed by Hinton
(2012) in his lecture 15b. The idea is simply to back-propagate through the hard threshold function
(1 if the argument is positive, 0 otherwise) as if it had been the identity function. It is clearly a biased
estimator, but when considering a single layer of neurons, it has the right sign (this is not guaranteed
anymore when back-propagating through more hidden layers). We call it the straight-through (ST)
estimator. A possible variant investigated here multiplies the gradient on hi by the derivative of the
sigmoid. Better results were actually obtained without multiplying by the derivative of the sigmoid.
With hi sampled as per Eq. 3, the straight-through estimator of the gradient of the loss L with respect
to the pre-sigmoid activation ai is thus
                                                       ∂L
                                               gi =        .                                            (13)
                                                       ∂hi
Like the other estimators, it is then back-propagated to obtain gradients on the parameters that
influence ai .

                                                     7
                                                                 Output"so)max"

                                                 Gated"units"(experts)"

              Gater"path"
                                                                                       Ga8ng"units="
                                                                       Main"path"


                                                         Input"
     Figure 1: Conditional computation architecture: gater path on the left produces sparse outputs hi
     which are multiplied elementwise by the expert outputs, hidden units Hi .

     5    Conditional Computation Experiments
     We consider the potential application of stochastic neurons in the context of conditional computa-
     tion, where the stochastic neurons are used to select which parts of some computational graph should
     be actually computed, given the current input. The particular architecture we experimented with is
     a neural network with a large hidden layer whose units Hi will be selectively turned off by gating
     units hi , i.e., the output of the i-th hidden unit is Hi hi , as illustrated in Figure 1. For this to make
     sense in the context of conditional computation, we want hi to be non-zero only a small fraction
     α of the time (10% in the experiments) while the amount of computation required to compute hi
     should be much less than the amount of computation required to compute Hi . In this way, we can
     first compute hi and only compute Hi if hi 6= 0, thereby saving much computation. To achieve
     this, we connect the previous layer to hi through a bottleneck layer. Hence if the previous layer (or
     the input) has size N and the main path layer also has size N (i.e., i ∈ {1, . . . N }), and the gater’s
1"   bottleneck layer has size M  N , then computing the gater output is O(M N ), which can reduce
     the main path computations from O(N 2 ) to O(αN 2 ).



                                                                                          train    valid    test
                                                            Noisy Rectifier              6.7e-4    1.52     1.87
                                                            Straight-through             3.3e-3    1.42     1.39
                                                            Smooth Times Stoch.          4.4e-3    1.86     1.96
                                                            Stoch. Binary Neuron         9.9e-3    1.78     1.89
                                                            Baseline Rectifier           6.3e-5    1.66     1.60
                                                            Baseline Sigmoid+Noise       1.8e-3    1.88     1.87
                                                            Baseline Sigmoid             3.2e-3    1.97     1.92




     Figure 2: Left: Learning curves for the various stochastic approaches applied to the MNIST dataset. The
     y-axis indicates classification error on the validation set. Right: Comparison of training criteria and valid/test
     classification error (%) for stochastic (top) and baseline (bottom) gaters.

     Experiments are performed with a gater of 400 hidden units and 2000 output units. The main path
     also has 2000 hidden units. A sparsity constraint is imposed on the 2000 gater output units such that
     each is non-zero 10% of the time, on average. The validation and test errors of the stochastic models
     are obtained after optimizing a threshold in their deterministic counterpart used during testing. See
     the appendix in supplementary material for more details on the experiments.
     For this experiment, we compare with 3 baselines. The Baseline Rectifier is just like the noisy
     rectifier, but with 0 noise, and is also constrained to have a sparsity of 10%. The Baseline Sigmoid
     is like the STS and ST models in that the gater uses sigmoids for its output and tanh for its hidden


                                                             8
units, but has no sparsity constraint and only 200 output units for the gater and main part. The
baseline has the same hypothetical resource constraint in terms of computational efficiency (run-
time), but has less total parameters (memory). The Baseline Sigmoid with Noise is the same, but
with Gaussian noise added during training.

6   Conclusion
In this paper, we have motivated estimators of the gradient through highly non-linear non-
differentiable functions (such as those corresponding to an indicator function), especially in net-
works involving noise sources, such as neural networks with stochastic neurons. They can be
useful as biologically motivated models and they might be useful for engineering (computational
efficiency) reasons when trying to reduce computation via conditional computation or to reduce
interactions between parameters via sparse updates (Bengio, 2013). We have proven interesting
properties of three classes of stochastic neurons, the noisy rectifier, the STS unit, and the binary
stochastic neuron, in particular showing the existence of an unbiased estimator of the gradient for
the latter. Unlike the SPSA (Spall, 1992) estimator, our estimator is unbiased even though the per-
turbations are not small (0 or 1), and it multiplies by the perturbation rather than dividing by it.
Experiments show that all the tested methods actually allow training to proceed. It is interesting
to note that the gater with noisy rectifiers yielded better results than the one with the non-noisy
baseline rectifiers. Similarly, the sigmoid baseline with noise performed better than without, even
on the training objective: all these results suggest that injecting noise can be useful not just as a
regularizer but also to help explore good parameters and fit the training objective. These results are
particularly surprising for the stochastic binary neuron, which does not use any backprop for getting
a signal into the gater, and opens the door to applications where no backprop signal is available. In
terms of conditional computation, we see that the expected saving is achieved, without an important
loss in performance. Another surprise is the good performance of the straight-through units, which
provided the best validation and test error, and are very simple to implement.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the useful comments from Guillaume Alain and funding
from NSERC, Ubisoft, CIFAR (YB is a CIFAR Fellow), and the Canada Research Chairs.




                                                  9
References
Bengio, Y. (2013). Deep learning of representations: Looking forward.             Technical Report
  arXiv:1305.0445, Universite de Montreal.
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. (2013). Unsupervised feature learning and deep learning:
  A review and new perspectives. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI).
Dayan, P. (1990). Reinforcement comparison. In Connectionist Models: Proceedings of the 1990
  Connectionist Summer School, San Mateo, CA.
El Hihi, S. and Bengio, Y. (1996). Hierarchical recurrent neural networks for long-term dependen-
  cies. In NIPS 8. MIT Press.
Fiete, I. R. and Seung, H. S. (2006). Gradient learning in spiking neural networks by dynamic
  perturbations of conductances. Physical Review Letters, 97(4).
Glorot, X., Bordes, A., and Bengio, Y. (2011). Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In AISTATS.
Goodfellow, I. J., Warde-Farley, D., Mirza, M., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. (2013). Maxout
  networks. In ICML’2013.
Hinton, G. (2012). Neural networks for machine learning. Coursera, video lectures.
Hinton, G. E., Sejnowski, T. J., and Ackley, D. H. (1984). Boltzmann machines: Constraint satis-
  faction networks that learn. Technical Report TR-CMU-CS-84-119, Carnegie-Mellon University,
  Dept. of Computer Science.
Hinton, G. E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2012). Im-
  proving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. Technical report,
  arXiv:1207.0580.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. (2012a). ImageNet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In NIPS’2012.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. (2012b). ImageNet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 (NIPS’2012).
Nair, V. and Hinton, G. E. (2010). Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines. In
  ICML’10.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. Nature, 323, 533–536.
Salakhutdinov, R. and Hinton, G. (2009). Semantic hashing. In International Journal of Approxi-
  mate Reasoning.
Spall, J. C. (1992). Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous perturbation gradient
  approximation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 37, 332–341.
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y., and Manzagol, P.-A. (2008). Extracting and composing
  robust features with denoising autoencoders. In ICML 2008.
Weaver, L. and Tao, N. (2001). The optimal reward baseline for gradient-based reinforcement learn-
 ing. In Proc. UAI’2001, pages 538–545.
Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms connectionist reinforcement
 learning. Machine Learning, 8, 229–256.




                                                 10
A     Details of the Experiments
We frame our experiments using a conditional computation architecture. We limit ourselves to
a simple architecture with 4 affine transforms. The output layer consists of an affine transform
followed by softmax over the 10 MNIST classes. The input is sent to a gating subnetwork and to
an experts subnetwork, as in Figure 1. There is one gating unit per expert unit, and the expert units
are hidden units on the main path. Each gating unit has a possibly stochastic non-linearity (different
under different algorithms evaluated here) applied on top of an affine transformation of the gater
path hidden layer (400 tanh units that follow another affine transformation applied on the input).
The gating non-linearity are either Noisy Rectifiers, Smooth Times Stochastic (STS), Stochastic
Binary Neurons (SBN), Straight-through (ST) or (non-noisy) Rectifiers over 2000 units.
The expert hidden units are obtained through an affine transform without any non-linearity, which
makes this part a simple linear transform of the inputs into 2000 expert hidden units. Together, the
gater and expert form a conditional layer. These could be stacked to create deeper architectures,
but this was not attempted here. In our case, we use but one conditional layer that takes its input
from the vectorized 28x28 MNIST images. The output of the conditional layer is the element-wise
multiplication of the (non-linear) output of the gater with the (linear) output of the expert. The idea
of using a linear transformation for the expert is derived from an analogy over rectifiers which can
be thought of as the product of a non-linear gater (1hi >0 ) and a linear expert (hi ).

A.1   Sparsity Constraint

Computational efficiency is gained by imposing a sparsity constraint on the output of the gater. All
experiments aim for an average sparsity of 10%, such that for 2000 expert hidden units we will
only require computing approximately 200 of them in average. Theoretically, efficiency can be
gained by only propagating the input activations to the selected expert units, and only using these to
compute the network output. For imposing the sparsity constraint we use a KL-divergence criterion
for sigmoids and an L1-norm criterion for rectifiers, where the amount of penalty is adapted to
achieve the target level of average sparsity.
A sparsity target of s = 0.1 over units i = 1...2000, each such unit having a mean activation of pi
within a mini-batch of 32 propagations, yields the following KL-divergence training criterion:
                                          X
                        KL(s||p) = −λ        (s log pi + (1 − s) log 1 − pi )                  (14)
                                            i
where λ is a hyper-parameter that can be optimized through cross-validation. In the case of rectifiers,
we use an L1-norm training criteria:
                                                    X
                                         L1(p) = λ      |pi |                                     (15)
In order to keep the effective sparsity se (the average proportion of non-zero gater activations in a
batch) of the rectifier near the target sparsity of s = 0.1, λ is increased when se > s + 0.01, and
reduced when se < s − 0.01. This simple approach was found to be effective at maintaining the
desired sparsity.

A.2   Beta Noise

There is a tendency for the KL-divergence criterion to keep the sigmoids around the target sparsity
of s = 0.1. This is not the kind of behavior desired from a gater, it indicates indecisiveness on the
part of the gating units. What we would hope to see is each unit maintain a mean activation of 0.1 by
producing sigmoidal values over 0.5 approximately 10% of the time. This would allow us to round
sigmoid values to zero or one at test time.
In order to encourage this behavior, we introduce noise at the input of the sigmoid, as in the se-
mantic hashing algorithm (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009). However, since we impose a sparsity
constraint of 0.1, we have found better results with noise sampled from a Beta distribution (which is
skewed) instead of a Gaussian distribution. To do this we limit ourselves to hyper-optimizing the β
parameter of the distribution, and make the α parameter a function of this β such that the mode of
the distribution is equal to our sparsity target of 0.1. Finally, we scale the samples from the distribu-
tion such that the sigmoid of the mode is equal to 0.1. We have observed that in the case of the STS,


                                                   11
introducing noise with a β of approximately 40.1 works bests. We considered values of 1.1, 2.6, 5.1,
10.1, 20.1, 40.1, 80.1 and 160.1. We also considered Gaussian noise and combinations thereof. We
did not try to introduce noise into the SBN or ST sigmoids since they were observed to have good
behavior in this regard.

A.3   Test-time Thresholds

Although injecting noise is useful during training, we found that better results could be obtained by
using a deterministic computation at test time, thus reducing variance, in a spirit of dropout (Hinton
et al., 2012). Because of the sparsity constraint with a target of 0.1, simply thresholding sigmoids at
0.5 does not yield the right proportion of 0’s. Instead, we optimized a threshold to achieve the target
proportion of 1’s (10%) when running in deterministic mode.

A.4   Hyperparameters

The noisy rectifier was found to work best with a standard deviation of 1.0 for the gaussian noise.
The stochastic half of the Smooth Times Stochastic is helped by the addition of noise sampled from
a beta distribution, as long as the mean of this distribution replaces it at test time. The Stochastic
Binary Neuron required a learning rate 100 times smaller for the gater (0.001) than for the main
part (0.1). The Straight-Through approach worked best without multiplying the estimated gradient
                                                    ∂L      ∂L
by the derivative of the sigmoid, i.e. estimating ∂a   i
                                                         by ∂h i
                                                                 where hi = 1zi >sigm(ai ) instead of
 ∂L
∂hi (1 − sigm(ai ))sigm(ai ). Unless indicated otherwise, we used a learning rate of 0.1 throughout
the architecture.
We use momentum for STS, have found that it has a negative effect for SBN, and has little to no
effect on the ST and Noisy Rectifier units. In all cases we explored using hard constraints on the
maximum norms of incoming weights to the neurons. We found that imposing a maximum norm of
2 works best in most cases.




                                                  12
