ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 1–18
                                        YA RN: E FFICIENT C ONTEXT W INDOW E XTENSION OF
                                        L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                            Bowen Peng†1             Jeffrey Quesnelle†1             Honglu Fan23           Enrico Shippole
                                                           1                        2                      3
                                                               Nous Research            EleutherAI             University of Geneva


                                                                                        A BSTRACT

                                                   Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE) have been shown to effectively encode posi-
arXiv:2309.00071v3 [cs.CL] 6 Feb 2026




                                                   tional information in transformer-based language models. However, these models
                                                   fail to generalize past the sequence length they were trained on. We present YaRN
                                                   (Yet another RoPE extensioN method), a compute-efficient method to extend the

ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 175–208
3     M ETHODOLOGY

Whereas PI stretches all RoPE dimensions equally, we find that the theoretical interpolation bound
described by PI (Chen et al., 2023) is insufficient at predicting the complex dynamics between RoPE
and the LLM’s internal embeddings. In the following subsections, we describe the main issues
with PI we have individually identified and solved, so as to give the readers the context, origin and
justifications of each method which we use in concert to obtain the full YaRN method.

3.1   L OSS OF H IGH F REQUENCY INFORMATION - "NTK- AWARE " INTERPOLATION

If we look at rotary position embeddings (RoPE) only from an information encoding perspective,
it was shown in (Tancik et al., 2020), using Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory, that deep neural
networks have trouble learning high frequency information if the input dimension is low and the
corresponding embeddings lack high frequency components. Here we can see the similarities: a
token’s positional information is one-dimensional, and RoPE expands it to an n-dimensional complex
vector embedding. RoPE closely resembles Fourier Features (Tancik et al., 2020) in many aspects, as
it is possible to define RoPE as a special 1D case of a Fourier Feature.
In the case of Positional Interpolation (PI), as we strech all dimensions equally by a factor s, it
removes the high frequency components of RoPE. This degradation is worsened as the scaling factor
s grows, and at some point, the network will not be able to recover. Previous fine-tunes (kaiokendev,
2023) (Chen et al., 2023) (Together.ai, 2023) (Quesnelle et al., 2023) using PI were only able to
achieve a scaling factor of roughly s = 8 before the LLM’s outputs starts to degrade, even after
fine-tuning.
In order to alleviate this issue, the "NTK-aware" interpolation was developed in (bloc97, 2023a).
Instead of scaling every dimension of RoPE equally by a factor s, we spread out the interpolation
pressure across multiple dimensions by scaling high frequencies less and low frequencies more. One
can obtain such a transformation in many ways, but the simplest would be to perform a base change
on the value of θ. The details are described in the Appendix A.2 and the method has seen some
open-source adoptions* .
One main issue of this "NTK-aware" scaling is that it is very difficult to determine what optimal base
should be used for an intended context extension by s times. The best base to use for "NTK-aware"
interpolation usually has to be found empirically, which significantly increases the difficulty and
cost of obtaining a successful fine-tuned model. Despite its limitations, the observations from the

ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 209–333
NTK theory is valid and the following idea is still maintained and executed in a different way in the
"NTK-by-parts" interpolation introduced in the next section.

3.2   L OSS OF R ELATIVE L OCAL D ISTANCES - "NTK- BY- PARTS " INTERPOLATION

To understand why "NTK-aware" interpolation works better than PI and to eliminate its disadvantages,
we have to take a closer look at RoPE. In this section, we think heavily in terms of the wavelengths
λd defined in Eq. 8 in the formula of RoPE. For simplicity, we omit the subscript d in λd and the
reader is encouraged to think about λ as the wavelength of an arbitrary periodic function.
In theory, as RoPE is a relative position embedding, it should be quite surprising that it fails to
generalize to unseen longer context sizes. However, we can show that in practice, RoPE does not
only encode relative position. One observation we can make is that given a context size L, there are
some dimensions d where the wavelength is longer than the maximum context length seen during
pretraining (λ > L), this suggests that some dimensions’ rotary embeddings might not be distributed
evenly in the rotational domain (i.e. does not perform a full rotation for the entire training context
size). In such cases, we presume having unique position pairs† implies that the absolute positional

   *We note that shortly before the release of this article, Code Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) was released

and uses "NTK-aware" scaling by manually scaling the base b to 1M, in which they call this method as RoPE
"adjusted base frequency" (ABF).
   †
     Since the dimension never rotates fully at least once during pre-training, if we pick the first token as the
anchor, every other token during pre-training has an unique distance to it, which the neural network can use to
determine its absolute position.


                                                       4
information remains intact in those dimensions. On the contrary, when the wavelength is short, only
relative positional information is accessible to the network.
Given these observations, we can see that it is important to not touch the dimensions that only encode
relative positional information, as they are crucial for the network to distinguish the relative order
of nearby tokens. Meanwhile, dimensions that only encode absolute positional information should
always be interpolated, as larger distances will be out of distribution. Instead of arbitrarily changing
the base in "NTK-aware" interpolation (which basically does something similar to what is described
here), we can formulate an explicit and targeted interpolation method that takes in account all of the
above.
In other words,

       • if the wavelength λ is much smaller than the context size L, we do not interpolate;
       • if the wavelength λ is equal to or bigger than the context size L, we want to only interpolate
         and avoid any extrapolation (unlike the previous "NTK-aware" method);
       • dimensions in-between can have a bit of both, similar to the "NTK-aware" interpolation.

As a result, it is more convenient to introduce the ratio r = Lλ between the original context size L and
the wavelength λ. This ratio represents the number of rotations a certain RoPE dimension makes
given a fixed pretrained context length L. In the d-th hidden state, the ratio r depends on d in the
following way:
                                                  L         L
                                          r(d) =      =       2d .                                  (10)
                                                  λd     2πb |D|
In order to define the boundary of the different interpolation strategies as above, we introduce
two extra parameters α, β. All hidden dimensions d where r(d) < α are those where we linearly
interpolate by a scale s (exactly like PI, avoiding any extrapolation), and the d where r(d) > β are
those where we do not interpolate at all. Define the ramp function γ to be
                                            
                                            
                                             0,        if r < α
                                            
                                    γ(r) = 1,           if r > β                                (11)
                                               r−α
                                                     , otherwise.
                                            
                                            
                                               β−α
                                            

With the help of the ramp function, the "NTK-by-parts" method can be described as follows.

Definition 1 The "NTK-by-parts" interpolation is a modification of RoPE using Eq. 7 with the
following functions‡ .
                              g(m) = m                                                             (12)
                                                 θ d         
                              h(θd ) = 1 − γ r(d)       + γ r(d) θd .                              (13)
                                                    s

The values of α and β should be tuned on a case-by-case basis. For example, we have found
experimentally that for the Llama family of models, good values for α and β are α = 1 and β = 32.
Using the techniques described in this section, a variant of the resulting method was released under
the name "NTK-by-parts" interpolation (bloc97, 2023b). This improved method performs better
than the previous PI (Chen et al., 2023) and "NTK-aware" 3.1 interpolation methods, both with
non-fine-tuned models and with fine-tuned models, as shown in (bloc97, 2023b) and Section 4.2.

3.3   YA RN

In addition to the previous interpolation techniques, we also observe that introducing a temperature t
on the logits before the attention softmax has a uniform impact on perplexity regardless of the data
   ‡
     The interpolation by linear ramp on h may have alternatives, such as a harmonic mean over θd /s and
θd converted from a linear interpolation on wavelengths. The choice of h here was for the simplicity of
implementation, but both would work.


                                                   5
sample and the token position over the extended context window (See Appendix A.3). More precisely,
instead of Eq. 2, we modify the computation of attention weights into
                                                           !
                                                      T
                                                    qm  kn
                                        softmax p            .                                 (14)
                                                    t |D|
The reparametrization of RoPE as a set of 2D matrices has a clear benefit on the implementation
                      p we can instead use a "length scaling" trick which scales both qm and kn
of this attention scaling:
by a constant factor 1/t by simply scaling the complex rotary position embeddings by the same
amount. With this, YaRN can effectively alter the attention mechanism without modifying its code.
Furthermore, it has zero overhead during both inference and training, as rotary position embeddings
are generated in advance and are reused for all forward passes. Combining it with the "NTK-by-parts"
interpolation, we have the YaRN method.
Definition 2 By the "YaRN method", we refer to a combination of the attention scaling in Eq. 14 and
the "NTK-by-parts" interpolation introduced in Section 3.2.
For LLaMA and Llama 2 models, we recommend the following values:

                                       r
                                         1
                                           = 0.1 ln(s) + 1.                                   (15)
                                         t
                                        p
The equation above is found by fitting 1/t at the lowest perplexity against the scale extension
by various factors s using the "NTK-by-parts" method (Section 3.2) on LLaMA 7b, 13b, 33b and
65b models without fine-tuning. We note that the same values of t also apply fairly well to Llama
2 models (7b, 13b and 70b). It suggests that the property of increased entropy and the temperature
constant t may have certain degree of "universality" and may be generalizable across some models

ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 358–386
the previous key-value vectors and improve the overall efficiency. We point out that in some
implementations when the rotary position embeddings are cached, some care has to be taken in order
to modify it for Dynamic Scaling with kv-caching. The correct implementation should cache the
kv-embeddings before applying rotary position embeddings, as the RoPE of every token changes
when s changes.


                                                 6
4       E XPERIMENTS

4.1       T RAINING

We broadly followed the training and evaluation procedures as outlined in Chen et al. (2023).
For training the 128k context window size models, we extended the Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b)
7B and 13B parameter models. No changes were made to the LLaMA model architecture other than
the calculation of the embedding frequencies as described in Section 3.3 with s = 16 and s = 32.
We used a learning rate of 2 × 10−5 with no weight decay and a linear warmup of 20 steps along
with AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.95. For the s = 16 model, we
fine-tuned for 400 steps with global batch size 64 using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) Fully Sharded
Data Parallelism (Zhao et al., 2023) and Flash Attention 2 (Dao, 2023) on the PG19 dataset (Rae et al.,
2020) chunked into 64k segments bookended with the BOS and EOS token. For s = 32 we followed
the same procedure, but due to compute constraints, we started from the finished s = 16 checkpoint
and trained for only an additional 200 steps. Note that the s = 32 model is also trained with 64k
context data, but we show that it is able to extrapolate to a context size of 128k in Section 4.2.
For the ablation studies, we used the LLaMA 7B model. It has the same architecture as the newer
Llama 2 models except for a shorter pretrained context window size§ , which reduces compute
requirements and allows for faster training and evaluations. The training procedure is similar to the
128k models, but we chunk the PG19 dataset into 32k segments instead, and train using s = 16 for

ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 391–407


Figure 2: Training loss curves for the LLaMA 7B model extended to 32k context size using different
interpolation techniques. The graph on the right is zoomed in.


4.2       L ONG S EQUENCE L ANGUAGE M ODELING

To evaluate the long sequence language modeling performances, we use the GovReport (Huang et al.,
2021) and Proof-pile (Azerbayev et al., 2022) datasets both of which contain many long sequence
samples. For all evaluations, the test splits of both datasets were used exclusively. All perplexity
evaluations were calculated using the sliding window method from Press et al. (2022) with S = 256,
which takes in account the entire documents’ perplexity contribution, even if the context window of
the model is shorter.
First, we select 10 random samples from Proof-pile with at least 128k tokens each and evaluate the
perplexity of each of these samples when truncated at 2k steps from a sequence length of 2k tokens
through 128k tokens. Table 1 shows the long sequence performance of fine-tuned Llama 2 s = 16

ORIGINAL PDF pdftotext -layout lines 439–462

Figure 3: Sliding window perplexity (S = 256) of ten 128k Proof-pile documents and passkey
retrieval accuracy at different prompt lengths for finetuned LLaMA 7B models fine-tuned to 32k
context for 400 steps using different interpolation techniques. YaRN outperforms other interpolation
methods given the same training budget.


4.3    PASSKEY R ETRIEVAL

The passkey retrieval task as defined in Mohtashami and Jaggi (2023) measures a model’s ability
to retrieve a simple passkey (i.e., a five-digit number) from amongst a large amount of otherwise
meaningless text. For our evaluation of the fine-tuned 32k LLaMA 7B models, we performed
50 iterations of the passkey retrieval task with the passkey placed at a random location uniformly
distributed across the evaluation context window on different prompt lengths ranging from 2k to 32k.
YaRN achieves higher scores compared to other interpolation methods when given similar training
budget, as seen in Figure 3 on the right. More results and comparisons for Llama 2 models are shown
in Appendix B.5.

4.4    S TANDARDIZED B ENCHMARKS

The Hugging Face Open LLM Leaderboard (Hugging Face, 2023) compares a multitude of
LLMs across a standardized set of four public benchmarks. Specifically, we use 25-shot ARC-
Challenge (Clark et al., 2018), 10-shot HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), 5-shot MMLU (Hendrycks
et al., 2021), and 0-shot TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022).

