
===== original layernorm-v1.txt, lines 1-34 =====
                                                                           Layer Normalization


                                                     Jimmy Lei Ba                   Jamie Ryan Kiros                 Geoffrey E. Hinton
                                                  University of Toronto            University of Toronto             University of Toronto
                                                jimmy@psi.toronto.edu             rkiros@cs.toronto.edu                and Google Inc.
                                                                                                                   hinton@cs.toronto.edu
arXiv:1607.06450v1 [stat.ML] 21 Jul 2016




                                                                                         Abstract

                                                    Training state-of-the-art, deep neural networks is computationally expensive. One
                                                    way to reduce the training time is to normalize the activities of the neurons. A
                                                    recently introduced technique called batch normalization uses the distribution of
                                                    the summed input to a neuron over a mini-batch of training cases to compute a
                                                    mean and variance which are then used to normalize the summed input to that
                                                    neuron on each training case. This significantly reduces the training time in feed-
                                                    forward neural networks. However, the effect of batch normalization is dependent
                                                    on the mini-batch size and it is not obvious how to apply it to recurrent neural net-
                                                    works. In this paper, we transpose batch normalization into layer normalization by
                                                    computing the mean and variance used for normalization from all of the summed
                                                    inputs to the neurons in a layer on a single training case. Like batch normalization,
                                                    we also give each neuron its own adaptive bias and gain which are applied after
                                                    the normalization but before the non-linearity. Unlike batch normalization, layer
                                                    normalization performs exactly the same computation at training and test times.
                                                    It is also straightforward to apply to recurrent neural networks by computing the
                                                    normalization statistics separately at each time step. Layer normalization is very
                                                    effective at stabilizing the hidden state dynamics in recurrent networks. Empiri-
                                                    cally, we show that layer normalization can substantially reduce the training time
                                                    compared with previously published techniques.


===== original layernorm-v1.txt, lines 100-132 =====
3   Layer normalization
We now consider the layer normalization method which is designed to overcome the drawbacks of
batch normalization.
Notice that changes in the output of one layer will tend to cause highly correlated changes in the
summed inputs to the next layer, especially with ReLU units whose outputs can change by a lot.
This suggests the “covariate shift” problem can be reduced by fixing the mean and the variance of
the summed inputs within each layer. We, thus, compute the layer normalization statistics over all
the hidden units in the same layer as follows:
                                                    v
                                     H              u      H
                            l    1  X
                                          l     l
                                                    u1 X                2
                           µ =          ai     σ =t            ali − µl                        (3)
                                 H i=1                 H i=1

where H denotes the number of hidden units in a layer. The difference between Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)
is that under layer normalization, all the hidden units in a layer share the same normalization terms
µ and σ, but different training cases have different normalization terms. Unlike batch normalization,
layer normaliztion does not impose any constraint on the size of a mini-batch and it can be used in
the pure online regime with batch size 1.


                                                  2
3.1   Layer normalized recurrent neural networks
The recent sequence to sequence models [Sutskever et al., 2014] utilize compact recurrent neural
networks to solve sequential prediction problems in natural language processing. It is common
among the NLP tasks to have different sentence lengths for different training cases. This is easy to
deal with in an RNN because the same weights are used at every time-step. But when we apply batch
normalization to an RNN in the obvious way, we need to to compute and store separate statistics for
each time step in a sequence. This is problematic if a test sequence is longer than any of the training
sequences. Layer normalization does not have such problem because its normalization terms depend
only on the summed inputs to a layer at the current time-step. It also has only one set of gain and
