Original pdftotext -layout line range 1-45
                                           Holistic Evaluation of Language Models
                                                                  Percy Liang† Rishi Bommasani† Tony Lee†1
                                         Dimitris Tsipras* Dilara Soylu* Michihiro Yasunaga* Yian Zhang* Deepak Narayanan* Yuhuai Wu*2
arXiv:2211.09110v1 [cs.CL] 16 Nov 2022




                                                 Ananya Kumar Benjamin Newman Binhang Yuan Bobby Yan Ce Zhang
                                             Christian Cosgrove Christopher D. Manning Christopher Ré Diana Acosta-Navas
                                         Drew A. Hudson Eric Zelikman Esin Durmus Faisal Ladhak Frieda Rong Hongyu Ren
                                          Huaxiu Yao Jue Wang Keshav Santhanam Laurel Orr Lucia Zheng Mert Yuksekgonul
                                         Mirac Suzgun Nathan Kim Neel Guha Niladri Chatterji Omar Khattab Peter Henderson
                                                Qian Huang Ryan Chi Sang Michael Xie Shibani Santurkar Surya Ganguli
                                          Tatsunori Hashimoto Thomas Icard Tianyi Zhang Vishrav Chaudhary William Wang
                                                            Xuechen Li Yifan Mai Yuhui Zhang Yuta Koreeda

                                                                  Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
                                                          Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI)
                                                                                  Stanford University
                                         Language models (LMs) are becoming the foundation for almost all major language technologies,
                                         but their capabilities, limitations, and risks are not well understood. We present Holistic Evaluation
                                         of Language Models (HELM) to improve the transparency of language models. First, we taxonomize
                                         the vast space of potential scenarios (i.e. use cases) and metrics (i.e. desiderata) that are of interest
                                         for LMs. Then we select a broad subset based on coverage and feasibility, noting what’s missing or
                                         underrepresented (e.g. question answering for neglected English dialects, metrics for trustworthiness).
                                         Second, we adopt a multi-metric approach: We measure 7 metrics (accuracy, calibration, robustness,
                                         fairness, bias, toxicity, and efficiency) for each of 16 core scenarios to the extent possible (87.5% of
                                         the time), ensuring that metrics beyond accuracy don’t fall to the wayside, and that trade-offs across
                                         models and metrics are clearly exposed. We also perform 7 targeted evaluations, based on 26 targeted
                                         scenarios, to more deeply analyze specific aspects (e.g. knowledge, reasoning, memorization/copyright,
                                         disinformation). Third, we conduct a large-scale evaluation of 30 prominent language models (spanning
                                         open, limited-access, and closed models) on all 42 scenarios, including 21 scenarios that were not
                                         previously used in mainstream LM evaluation. Prior to HELM, models on average were evaluated on
                                         just 17.9% of the core HELM scenarios, with some prominent models not sharing a single scenario in
                                         common. We improve this to 96.0%: now all 30 models have been densely benchmarked on a set of core
                                         scenarios and metrics under standardized conditions. Our evaluation surfaces 25 top-level findings
                                         concerning the interplay between different scenarios, metrics, and models. For full transparency, we
                                         release all raw model prompts and completions publicly3 for further analysis, as well as a general
                                         modular toolkit for easily adding new scenarios, models, metrics, and prompting strategies.4 We intend
                                         for HELM to be a living benchmark for the community, continuously updated with new scenarios,
                                         metrics, and models.




Original pdftotext -layout line range 334-362
                     XSUM      ✔ (Accuracy)                   IMDB        ✔         ✔          ✔          ✔        ✔        ✔           ✔
                 AdversarialQA ✔ (Robustness)                Natural
                                                            Questions     ✔         ✔          ✔          ✔        ✔        ✔           ✔
                  RealToxicity
                     Prompts   ✔ (Toxicity)                   QuAC        ✔         ✔          ✔          ✔        ✔        ✔           ✔
                       BBQ     ✔ (Bias)                       XSUM        ✔                                        ✔        ✔           ✔

Fig. 3. Many metrics for each use case. In comparison to most prior benchmarks of language technologies,
which primarily center accuracy and often relegate other desiderata to their own bespoke datasets (if at all),
in HELM we take a multi-metric approach. This foregrounds metrics beyond accuracy and allows one to
study the tradeoffs between the metrics.


Multi-metric measurement. HELM currently implements a core5 set of 16 scenarios and 7
(categories of) metrics. Our scenarios, which are triples of (task, domain, language), span 6 user-
facing tasks (e.g. question answering, information retrieval, summarization, toxicity detection),
several domains (e.g. news, books), and currently only English (though we cover several English
varieties such as African-American English and the English varieties spoken in different English-
speaking countries). And our 7 categories of metrics reflect a range of societal considerations (i.e.
accuracy, calibration, robustness, fairness, bias, toxicity, efficiency). We emphasize that while we
have specific quantitative metrics for all of these considerations, they (e.g. fairness) are complex
and contested social constructs that can be operationalized in many different ways. Consistent with
our second element of holistic evaluation, we ensure our benchmark attains dense multi-metric
measurement: of the 112 possible (core scenario, metric) pairs, we measure 98 (87.5%) as shown in
Table 4.
   This multi-metric perspective conveys a position we take on evaluation practices in AI. While
most benchmarks primarily foreground accuracy, perhaps deferring the evaluation of other metrics
(e.g. the extent to which models generate toxic content) to separate scenarios (e.g. RealToxici-
tyPrompts), we believe it is integral that all of these metrics be evaluated in the same contexts

Original pdftotext -layout line range 480-510

GitHub Copilot). That is, several of these models are having direct social impact at present. The
absence of an evaluation standard compromises the community’s ability to clearly and rigorously
understand the overall landscape of language models. To demonstrate how uneven language model
evaluation has been, we annotated the datasets used to evaluate more than 40 language models
(i.e. all models evaluated in this work along with others like PaLM and Gopher) in Appendix F.
We found major models such as T5 (11B) and Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B) were not evaluated on
a single dataset in common in their original works (Raffel et al., 2019; Askell et al., 2021). In fact,
several models (e.g. J1-Grande v1 (17B), Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B), YaLM (100B)) do not
report any public results prior to our effort (to our knowledge). And even for datasets that are
frequently evaluated for across all 405 datasets evaluated in major language modeling works (e.g.
HellaSwag; many of the datasets within GLUE and SuperGLUE), we find the evaluation conditions
vary greatly. On HellaSwag, some prior work reports fine-tuned accuracies (e.g. T5 (11B)), whereas
others report prompting accuracies (e.g. GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)).7 Even when works report results
through few-shot prompting, the exact details can vary, which in §8.2: prompting-analysis we
show leads to wild swings in accuracies (e.g. 30% to 80% for the same (model, scenario) pair) as
discussed by Zhao et al. (2021).
    In Figure 4, we make explicit how our evaluation changes the status quo. Previously, on average
models were evaluated on 17.9% of our core scenarios, even after compiling evaluations dispersed
across different prior works. We improve this to 96.0%.8 By both evaluating these models on the
same scenarios and by conducting the evaluation under standardized conditions (e.g. using the
same few-shot prompting for all models), we facilitate direct head-to-head comparisons.
The importance of adaptation. To benchmark these models, we must specify an adaptation
procedure that uses the general-purpose language model to tackle a given scenario (see Bommasani
et al., 2021, §4.3). In this work, we adapt all language models through few-shot prompting, as
pioneered by GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). Furthermore, we opted to choose relatively simple, generic
prompts in order to orient the development of language models towards generic language interfaces
that respond robustly to direct natural language, rather than requiring model-specific incantations.
Certainly stronger results could be obtained from more sophisticated prompting (e.g. chain-of-
thoughts; Wei et al., 2022c), prompt decomposition (Wu et al., 2022; Press et al., 2022; Arora et al.,
2022), and prompt-tuning (Lester et al., 2021; Li and Liang, 2021), potentially leading to qualitatively

Original pdftotext -layout line range 810-835
     (5) Interactive results and codebase. We provide a public website with all results, underly-
         ing model predictions and adaptation details, along an extensible codebase to support the
         community in taking HELM further.31
Acknowledging the prior work this effort builds on. To build our holistic evaluation of lan-
guage models, we directly build on top of many prior works. While we advocate for evaluating
language models in their totality, i.e. centralizing many disparate evaluations, we want to be explicit
that the underlying works across the AI community should be recognized and cited, as HELM
would not exist in its current form without them. In particular, if the results of HELM are used by
future work or new models are evaluated on HELM, they should cite the works that created the
many datasets/evaluation that constitute HELM.32 For this reason, we provide the BibTeX entries
for all of these works in the codebase33 and explicitly acknowledge the associated work for every
evaluation on the website.34

2      PRELIMINARIES
We introduce the basic primitives (scenario, adaptation, metric) required to evaluate a language
model (Figure 5). With these primitives, we then provide a roadmap for how we holistically evaluate
language models.

2.1      Scenarios
A scenario instantiates a desired use case for a language model. Useful language models are
performant on a variety of scenarios: scenarios are what we want models to do. While practical
use cases for language models involve other factors, we operationalize scenarios through a list of
instances, divided into a training set and one or more test sets. Each instance consists of (i) an input
(a string) and (ii) a list of references. Each reference is a string annotated with properties relevant
for evaluation (e.g. is it correct or acceptable?). See Figure 6 for an example scenario.


Original pdftotext -layout line range 1730-1750
4.2      Selection
To select the desiderata we will quantitatively measure, we simply take all desiderata that satisfy
our conditions: (i) no assumptions on the construction or structure of the model, (ii) no access
beyond blackbox access, and (iii) no assumptions on the broader system/context. This yields the
following list: accuracy, uncertainty/calibration, robustness, fairness, bias, toxicity, inference efficiency.
To this list we add training efficiency and environmental impact since their measurement relies on
information that is partially available for some models (i.e. reported in associated papers). Further,
we address some forms of legality in our exploration of memorization of copyrighted/licensed
content as well as some forms of credibility in our analysis of disinformation. Finally, while we do
not address sample efficiency in the sense of the data used to train the language model (due to our
constraint on assumptions on how the model is constructed), we do address sample efficiency in
the sense of data used to adapt the language model (we do 5-shot prompting, with ablations of the
number of in-context examples in §8.2: prompting-analysis). Beyond what we end up measuring,
we suggest a prioritized set of areas for improvement in §10.2: missing-metrics.
Multi-metric coverage. To emphasize the multi-metric nature of our holistic approach, we depict
the matrix of results (Table 4) that we compute for every model, highlighting our benchmark’s

Holistic Evaluation of Language Models                                                                                                                            29

              Task                          Scenario Name             Accuracy Calibration   Robustness      Fairness   Bias and Stereotypes   Toxicity   Efficiency
                                                                                             Inv Equiv    Dialect R G   (R, P) (G, P) R G

Original pdftotext -layout line range 4478-4526

Fig. 40. Targeted evaluation of social bias. Model performance on targeted evaluations for bias on BBQ.



see consistent trends with Codex davinci v2 consistently outperforming Codex cushman v1 for
both HumanEval and APPS, sometimes by large margins (e.g. 10.% strict correctness vs. 2.6%
on APPS). We note that we do not evaluate any of text models on these code scenarios, though
in some cases this may be sensible/desirable given the striking generality of model development,
deployment, and validation/scrutiny. Conversely, while we evaluate the code models for LSAT and
LegalSupport, we find achieve accuracies of 0%. Overall, we find InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)
and, especially, Codex davinci v2 display very strong reasoning capabilities for many different
forms of reasoning.

Holistic Evaluation of Language Models                                                                     75


Memorization & Copyright. To further explore the results for this targeted evaluation, see
https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/v1.0/?group=copyright_text, https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/v1.0/
?group=copyright_code and Figure 39. We evaluated various models for their ability to reproduce
copyrighted text or licensed code. When evaluating source code regurgitation, we only extract
from models specialized to code (Codex davinci v2 and Codex cushman v1). When evaluating text
regurgitation, we extract from all models except those specialized to code.
   Overall, we find that models only regurgitate infrequently, with most models not regurgitating at
all under our evaluation setup. However, in the rare occasion where models regurgitate, large spans
of verbatim content are reproduced. For instance, while no model in our suite reliably reproduces
content given prompts taken from randomly sampled books, some models can reproduce large
chunks of popular books given short prompts. Notably, we observe that GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)
and Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B) reproduce non-trivial spans of the first few pages of several Harry
Potter books, and OPT (175B) and Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B) reproduce large spans of the children’s
book "Oh, the Places You’ll Go!"73
   On average, we see that models specialized to code reproduce source code content to a larger
degree than non-code models for text with the prompt sources we collected (e.g. Figure 39 shows
that both the prefix-length-normalized LCS and edit similarity are higher for the code component
than the text component). In addition, we observe cases where the code model not only reproduces
the functional aspects of the code but also the comments verbatim.

Disinformation. Since we do not have automated metrics at present for many aspects of human
evaluation, and the effectiveness of disinformation strongly depends on (potentially very) subjective
human judgments, we primarily measure model behavior for disinformation through human
evaluation. Consequently, we defer discussion to §8.5.2: human-evaluation-disinformation.

Bias. To further explore the results for this targeted evaluation, see https://crfm.stanford.edu/
helm/v1.0/?group=bbq. For BBQ, we begin by noting the very striking finding for model accuracy:
InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*) achieves an accuracy of 89.5%, which is much greater than any
other model, with T0++ (11B) (48.4%) and TNLG v2 (530B) (44.9%) as the second and third most
accurate, with not other model achieving accuracy above 40%.
   With this in mind, we see that accuracy shows a very strong clear correlation with social bias in
ambiguous contexts (Figure 40). That is, InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*) demonstrates the strongest

Original pdftotext -layout line range 6735-6760
evaluation of reasoning capabilities.
Eric Zelikman (Reasoning): Implemented the GSM8K and synthetic reasoning scenarios as part
of the targeted evaluation of reasoning capabilities. Wrote documentation for how to implement
new scenarios and metrics.
Esin Durmus (Summarization): Helped with the design and analysis of the summarization scenar-
ios, including the human evaluation of summarization.
Faisal Ladhak (Summarization): Led the design, implementation, and analysis of the summariza-
tion scenarios, including leading the human evaluation of summarization.
Frieda Rong (Reasoning): Implemented the MATH scenario as part of the targeted evaluation of
reasoning capabilities.
Hongyu Ren (Knowledge): Designed and implemented the WikiFact scenario as part of the tar-
geted evaluation of world knowledge.
Huaxiu Yao (Robustness): Implemented the IMDB scenario and the typos perturbation for evalu-
ating robustness.

116                                                       Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)


Jue Wang (Infrastructure): Helped set up the Together Research Computer and ran evaluations on
all the open models.
Keshav Santhanam (Efficiency): Helped design and implement the synthetic efficiency scenario
and associated metrics.
Laurel Orr (Reasoning): Implemented the entity matching and data imputation scenarios as part
of the targeted evaluation of reasoning capabilities.
Lucia Zheng (Knowledge): Conducted the data annotation and preprocessing for the WikiFact
scenario as part of the targeted evaluation of world knowledge.
