Skip to content
Navigation Menu
Platform
Solutions
Resources
Open Source
Enterprise
Pricing
Search
/
Sign in
Sign up
birdhackor
/
tiny-perceptron-vlm
Public
Notifications
Fork 0
 Star 0
Code
Issues
Pull requests
Actions
Projects
Security and quality
Insights
045ca23f28921d0feb81734390228a6e3eb97ca6
Breadcrumbs
tiny-perceptron-vlm
/README_en.md
Latest commit
 
History
History
File metadata and controls
Preview
Code
Blame
91 lines (59 loc) · 10.8 KB
Raw
Tiny Perceptron 小小感知機

How does a computer choose the next character after a short phrase? This from-scratch course starts with character IDs and a next-character table, using worked examples, diagrams and short programs to explain text, image and audio models.

繁體中文 | English

Online course · Reading routes · First steps · 266 lessons · Training recipes — the main course is in Traditional Chinese.

This preview provides lesson text, SVG diagrams and actual CPU outputs. Each lesson has an Open in Colab button for the same complete notebook. In notebooks with code, the first code cell prepares the repository and packages. Small exercises need no GPU. Notebook downloads are also available for local practice. Execution in a real Colab runtime has not been verified.

The course has 20 chapters, three optional branches and 266 lesson notebooks, with original SVG diagrams and progressive highlights. Including 26 numbered reading, warmup, training and glossary sections, there are 292 numbered sections. Begin with small matrices, bigrams, MLPs and manual attention; introduce modern architecture, Dense/MoE, cache/SDPA, quantization and distillation later. Readers can switch models and revisit earlier examples.

Core modules implement data handling, Transformers, multimodal inputs, DPO, packed quantization and training utilities directly in PyTorch. CLI tools cover data preparation, training, inference and evaluation; LoRA, QAT and small RL exercises demonstrate individual mechanisms. Chapter 20 combines publicly available vision-language and Mandarin transcription models into an assistant you can try.

After the concrete continuation example in 7.11, 7.17–7.18 explain why pre-training and post-training often use different data and learning signals. Start with the two-answer comparison in 13.1, then follow 13.10–13.17 for reward models, the roles in a typical RLHF pipeline, PPO and DPO. The PPO experiment selects finite, prewritten candidate responses; it does not train an autoregressive language model.

Chapter 19 has trained text, conversation and joint tasks sequentially on the same small MoE core, preserving a DPO comparison, quantized versions and deployment evaluations. Tasks are limited to a synthetic small world with individually checkable answers. The recommended joint-task model passes 78/90 final test records; its remaining failures are listed in 19.12. Before trying the interface in 19.1, follow 19.11 to obtain the specified inference file. The 11 capstone and student inference files are now public in a separate Chapter 19 download manifest. They share the same Hugging Face repository as the original 30 experiment groups and 120 checkpoint files below; use the appropriate manifest for each batch.

The smaller Dense students have also completed the demonstration-only and distillation comparison. On the same 90 records, the demonstration-only student passes 62, the student trained with teacher distributions passes 61, and its 4-bit export still passes 61. Distillation did not outperform demonstration-only training in this fixed recipe. The student report preserves individual results; these models do not establish general assistant capability.

Chapter 20 starts from Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct, using photographs, Chinese transcription examples and conversation demonstrations to train LoRA candidates and compare them with the original model. Validation selects the original model without an adapter for this release. Whisper-large-v3-turbo transcribes Mandarin speech before the same chat model receives the text. Try the assistant through 20.2 or the student guide; the capability card explains its measured limits. To reproduce the experiments, follow the separate data guide and training guide. Completing Chapter 19 training is not a prerequisite.

You can begin without prior knowledge of this project. Linked warmups introduce Python, tensors, probability, matrices, gradients and notebook operation as they become necessary. Lessons explain the problem and a worked example before introducing terminology. Small CPU programs verify individual mechanisms. Separate formal experiments update weights, evaluate fixed held-out records and preserve code versions, data provenance and per-record results. Controlled synthetic tasks and short natural-data pilots do not establish general assistant capability. See the experiment plan and progress and validation report.

Setup

Install uv and Git. For CPU exercises:

git clone https://github.com/birdhackor/tiny-perceptron-vlm.git
cd tiny-perceptron-vlm
uv sync --frozen --extra cpu --group notebook
source .venv/bin/activate
python scripts/check_env.py
python -m ipykernel install --sys-prefix --name tiny-perceptron --display-name "Tiny Perceptron"
jupyter lab notebooks

On Windows PowerShell, activate with .venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1. Select Tiny Perceptron and open notebooks/01/1.1.ipynb. Use uv sync --frozen --group notebook on Apple Silicon, or the matching cu126/cu130 extra on compatible NVIDIA hardware. Driver requirements are in environment notes.

Activate .venv and use python directly, or pass the same extra to each uv run. Local lesson checks use CPU; formal GPU training for chapters 1–19 uses NVIDIA L4 on Modal with PyTorch 2.14.1+cu126. Versions and results are recorded in the experiment reports. Chapter 20 uses a separate Python 3.12 and PyTorch 2.8.0 environment, with CUDA 12.8 packages for GPU training; see the student instructions. The macOS CI verified basic matrix forward/backward operations on Apple MPS and a CPU comparison. The full course and formal model training have not been validated on MPS; see the CI evidence.

Read the online course built with Zensical: full-text search, chapter navigation, page contents, light/dark modes and code copying. Every lesson retains its notebook download and Colab entry. SVGs can be enlarged, retain static labels and respect reduced-motion preferences. Website builds require the separate --group site. See publishing instructions for local reading, verified outputs and GitHub Pages deployment. MathJax typesets formulas when online.

Minimal workflow
python scripts/prepare_data.py --kind toy-text
python scripts/train.py --task text --data data/generated/toy-text/train.jsonl

The default runs one forward/backward check with no optimizer update or checkpoint write. Add --train explicitly for training. Training recipes describe prerequisites, formats, evaluation and limitations for text, style, safety, multimodal, preferences and distillation.

Fixed training snapshots are published as separate Git LFS archives. Use python scripts/fetch_training_assets.py --list to choose and unpack them. Raw caches, checkpoints and outputs stay in ignored data/, checkpoints/ and outputs/. External datasets retain their own licenses; see asset storage.

With Modal and Hugging Face configured, manually run the GPU training smoke test GitHub Actions workflow to verify GPU parameter updates, checkpoint uploads and resuming from an HF download. See the GPU operations guide for account settings, time limits and result checks.

To inspect trained models without retraining, use the public student weights: 30 experiment groups with 120 checkpoint files, including different sizes and teacher/student comparisons. The download manifest contains only published, pinned revisions; downloads verify each file hash. Model cards document scope, data licenses and measured results. From the installed CPU environment above:

python scripts/fetch_course_models.py --list
python scripts/check_course_models.py --model text_foundation

The second command anonymously downloads the foundation models, verifies files and runs CPU inference. It checks loading and execution; task accuracy comes from the separate held-out evaluation. Public inference exports omit optimizer and RNG state and cannot reproduce an exact resumed training trajectory. Full training backups are stored separately.

Maintenance

Edit course/chapters/, format that file’s Python examples, then regenerate notebooks. Each section needs an independent reader review of its current text and SVGs, followed by a separate reviewer checking facts, original sources and measured evidence. See the editorial protocol and technical review protocol. Publication rejects outdated reviews. Components live in tiny_perceptron/; SVGs live in course/figures/, with generated examples in scripts/build_visuals.py.

python scripts/build_visuals.py
python scripts/format_course_code.py course/chapters/01.md
python scripts/build_course.py
python scripts/build_course.py --check
python scripts/check_course_reviews.py
python scripts/check_technical_reviews.py
python scripts/check_notebooks.py --mode python
python scripts/check_notebooks.py --mode kernel --lesson 3.6
pytest -ra
ruff check .
ruff format --check .

Kernel mode starts a fresh kernel per lesson and saves executed copies under outputs/. Existing GitHub Actions run core checks on Linux, macOS and Windows; complete notebook validation is a separate workflow.

References and license

Inspired by nanoGPT, nanochat, MiniMind, MiniMind-V and nanoVLM. Research sources and limitations are in curriculum notes.

Code, course text and original diagrams: MIT. External data has separate licensing.

Footer
© 2026 GitHub, Inc.
Footer navigation
Terms
Privacy
Security
Status
Community
Docs
Contact
Manage cookies
Do not share my personal information