                                         Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2022) 1-40             Submitted 8/21; Revised 3/22; Published 4/22




                                          Switch Transformers: Scaling to Trillion Parameter Models
                                                     with Simple and Efficient Sparsity

                                         William Fedus∗
                                         liamfedus@google.com
                                         Barret Zoph∗
                                         barretzoph@google.com
arXiv:2101.03961v3 [cs.LG] 16 Jun 2022



ORIGINAL PDF TEXT LINES 279-315
2.1 Simplifying Sparse Routing
Mixture of Expert Routing. Shazeer et al. (2017) proposed a natural language Mixture-
of-Experts (MoE) layer which takes as an input a token representation x and then routes
this to the best determined top-k experts, selected from a set {Ei (x)}N  i=1 of N experts.
The router variable Wr produces logits h(x) = Wr · x which are normalized via a softmax
distribution over the available N experts at that layer. The gate-value for expert i is given
by,
                                               eh(x)i
                                    pi (x) = PN          .                                (1)
                                                   h(x)j
                                               j e

The top-k gate values are selected for routing the token x. If T is the set of selected top-k
indices then the output computation of the layer is the linearly weighted combination of
each expert’s computation on the token by the gate value,
                                         X
                                    y=      pi (x)Ei (x).                                 (2)
                                         i∈T

    Switch Routing: Rethinking Mixture-of-Experts. Shazeer et al. (2017) conjec-
tured that routing to k > 1 experts was necessary in order to have non-trivial gradients to
the routing functions. The authors intuited that learning to route would not work without
the ability to compare at least two experts. Ramachandran and Le (2018) went further to

                                                    5
                                              Fedus, Zoph and Shazeer




study the top-k decision and found that higher k-values in lower layers in the model were
important for models with many routing layers. Contrary to these ideas, we instead use
a simplified strategy where we route to only a single expert. We show this simplification
preserves model quality, reduces routing computation and performs better. This k = 1
routing strategy is later referred to as a Switch layer. Note that for both MoE and Switch
Routing, the gate value pi (x) in Equation 2 permits differentiability of the router.
    The benefits for the Switch layer are three-fold: (1) The router computation is reduced

ORIGINAL PDF TEXT LINES 390-442
suring lower rates of dropped tokens are important for the scaling of sparse expert-models.
Throughout our experiments we didn’t notice any dependency on the number of experts
for the number of tokens dropped (typically < 1%). Using the auxiliary load balancing loss
(next section) with a high enough coefficient ensured good load balancing. We study the
impact that these design decisions have on model quality and speed in Table 1.
    A Differentiable Load Balancing Loss. To encourage a balanced load across experts
we add an auxiliary loss (Shazeer et al., 2017, 2018; Lepikhin et al., 2020). As in Shazeer
et al. (2018); Lepikhin et al. (2020), Switch Transformers simplifies the original design in
Shazeer et al. (2017) which had separate load-balancing and importance-weighting losses.
For each Switch layer, this auxiliary loss is added to the total model loss during training.
Given N experts indexed by i = 1 to N and a batch B with T tokens, the auxiliary loss is
computed as the scaled dot-product between vectors f and P ,
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                     loss = α · N ·         fi · Pi                                (4)
                                                      i=1

where fi is the fraction of tokens dispatched to expert i,
                                        1 X
                                 fi =       1{argmax p(x) = i}                                     (5)
                                        T
                                         x∈B

and Pi is the fraction of the router probability allocated for expert i, 2
                                                1 X
                                         Pi =       pi (x).                                        (6)
                                                T
                                                  x∈B

Since we seek uniform routing of the batch of tokens across the N experts, we desire both
vectors to have values of 1/N . The auxiliary loss of Equation 4 encourages uniform routing
since it is minimized under a uniform distribution. The objective can also be differentiated as
2. A potential source of confusion: pi (x) is the probability of routing token x to expert i. Pi is the
   probability fraction to expert i across all tokens in the batch B.


                                                  7
                                   Fedus, Zoph and Shazeer




the P -vector is differentiable, but the f -vector is not. The final loss is multiplied by expert
count NPto keep the loss  PNconstant   as the number of experts varies since under uniform
            N                     1
routing i=1 (fi · Pi ) = i=1 ( N · N ) = N1 . Finally, a hyper-parameter α is a multiplicative
                                     1

coefficient for these auxiliary losses; throughout this work we use an α = 10−2 which was
sufficiently large to ensure load balancing while small enough to not to overwhelm the
primary cross-entropy objective. We swept hyper-parameter ranges of α from 10−1 to 10−5
in powers of 10 and found 10−2 balanced load quickly without interfering with training loss.

