
--- pdftotext -layout lines 1-38 ---
                                        Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




                                        ÌR ULER: What’s the Real Context Size of Your
                                        Long-Context Language Models?

                                            Cheng-Ping Hsieh∗ , Simeng Sun∗ , Samuel Kriman, Shantanu Acharya
                                            Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, Boris Ginsburg
                                            NVIDIA
                                            {chsieh,simengs}@nvidia.com
arXiv:2404.06654v3 [cs.CL] 6 Aug 2024




                                                                                   Abstract

                                                   The needle-in-a-haystack (NIAH) test, which examines the ability to re-
                                                   trieve a piece of information (the “needle”) from long distractor texts (the
                                                   “haystack”), has been widely adopted to evaluate long-context language
                                                   models (LMs). However, this simple retrieval-based test is indicative of
                                                   only a superficial form of long-context understanding. To provide a more
                                                   comprehensive evaluation of long-context LMs, we create a new synthetic
                                                   benchmark R ULER with flexible configurations for customized sequence
                                                   length and task complexity. R ULER expands upon the vanilla NIAH test to
                                                   encompass variations with diverse types and quantities of needles. More-
                                                   over, R ULER introduces new task categories multi-hop tracing and aggre-
                                                   gation to test behaviors beyond searching from context. We evaluate 17
                                                   long-context LMs with 13 representative tasks in R ULER. Despite achieving
                                                   nearly perfect accuracy in the vanilla NIAH test, almost all models ex-
                                                   hibit large performance drops as the context length increases. While these
                                                   models all claim context sizes of 32K tokens or greater, only half of them
                                                   can maintain satisfactory performance at the length of 32K. Our analysis
                                                   of Yi-34B, which supports context length of 200K, reveals large room for
                                                   improvement as we increase input length and task complexity. We open
                                                   source R ULER to spur comprehensive evaluation of long-context LMs.

--- pdftotext -layout lines 348-422 ---

3.4   Question Answering (QA)

The majority of existing QA datasets (Rajpurkar et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Trivedi
et al., 2022) are designed to answer questions based on short passages. These datasets
   4We draw inspiration from Zipf’s Law (Kingsley Zipf, 1932). Let N be the total number of words,
which is determined by the context size, the frequency of the k-th ranked word (the k-th most frequently
                    −α
appeared word) is kζ (αN) , where ζ (α) is the Zeta function. We set the top-ranked word to noise.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




can be extended to simulate long-context input by adding distracting information. In this
task category, we insert the golden paragraphs (i.e., the paragraphs that contain answers)
into paragraphs randomly sampled from the same dataset. This category is a real-world
adaptation (Ivgi et al., 2023) of NIAH, where the question serves as the query, the golden
paragraphs are the “needles”, and the distracting paragraphs form the “haystack”.


4    Experiments & Results

Models & Inference setup We select 17 long-context LLMs, including 15 open-source
models and two closed-source model (Gemini-1.5-Pro and GPT-4 ), covering diverse model
sizes (7B to 8x22B with MoE architecture) and claimed context lengths (32K to 1M). Com-
plete information about these models is included in Appendix A. We evaluate all models
using vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), an LLM serving system with efficient KV cache memory
management. For all models, we run the inference in BFloat16 on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs
with greedy decoding.

Task configurations We test all models on 13 tasks ranging diverse complexities from the
four categories of R ULER. The test configurations have been selected (shown in Appendix B)
based on a task correlational study described in Appendix C. We select these tasks as most
models perform decently at short context size of 4K tokens. Our main goal is to see whether
models can maintain such good performance with the scaling of context length. For each
task, we evaluate each model with 500 examples generated for each length from the series
(4K, 8K, 16K, 32K, 64K, 128K), while complying with each model’s necessary chat template.5
To prevent the model from refusing to answer a query or generating explanations, we
append the task input with an answer prefix and check the presence of the target output
with recall-based accuracy.

Effective Context Size We notice large performance degradation in all models as we
increase input length in R ULER. To determine the maximum context size a model can
effectively handle, we grade each model with a fixed threshold, passing which indicates
satisfactory performance at the length of evaluation. We use the performance of Llama2-7b
model at the 4K context length as the threshold. We report in Table 3 the maximum length
exceeding the threshold as the “effective length” along with the “claimed length”.

Model Ranking Criteria While the threshold-based grading reveals the discrepancy
between claimed and effective length, it lacks details for fine-grained model comparisons.
As such, we use a weighted average score to aggregate model performance across various
context sizes. We rank models under two weighting schemes: wAvg. (inc) and wAvg. (dec)
where the weight linearly increases and decreases with sequence length respectively. Ideally,
the weight for each length should be determined by the length distribution of model usage,
here we choose the two schemes to simulate the scenarios where longer sequences (inc) or
shorter sequences (dec) dominate the distribution.

Main Results We include the results of 17 long-context LMs in comparison with the
Llama2-7B baseline in Table 3.6 The performance at a certain length is the average of all
13 tasks in R ULER. The closed-source model Gemini-1.5-Pro outperforms the rest of the
models by a large margin, with the effective length greater than the maximum length we
have tested on. Pressure testing this model with harder version of RULER can be interesting
to follow up in the future. For the rest of the models, while they achieve nearly perfect
performance on the passkey retrieval and the vanilla NIAH task (shown in Appendix E),
all of them exhibit large degradation in RULER as sequence length increases and they
fail to maintain performance above the Llama2-7B baseline at their claimed length. The
top-ranked open-source models (Llama3.1, Qwen2 and Command-R-plus) share common
configurations, such as having larger model sizes and using larger base frequencies in
    5 See Appendix D for model and tasks templates details.
    6 Performance of base models and breakdown by task categories can be found in Appendix F.
