                                                     Direct Preference Optimization:
                                             Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model


                                                         Rafael Rafailov∗†                   Archit Sharma∗†            Eric Mitchell∗†

                                                       Stefano Ermon†‡                 Christopher D. Manning†             Chelsea Finn†
arXiv:2305.18290v3 [cs.LG] 29 Jul 2024




                                                                                  †
                                                                            Stanford University ‡ CZ Biohub
                                                                {rafailov,architsh,eric.mitchell}@cs.stanford.edu



                                                                                               Abstract

                                                      While large-scale unsupervised language models (LMs) learn broad world knowl-
                                                      edge and some reasoning skills, achieving precise control of their behavior is
                                                      difficult due to the completely unsupervised nature of their training. Existing
                                                      methods for gaining such steerability collect human labels of the relative quality of
                                                      model generations and fine-tune the unsupervised LM to align with these prefer-
                                                      ences, often with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However,
                                                      RLHF is a complex and often unstable procedure, first fitting a reward model that
                                                      reflects the human preferences, and then fine-tuning the large unsupervised LM
                                                      using reinforcement learning to maximize this estimated reward without drifting
                                                      too far from the original model. In this paper we introduce a new parameterization
                                                      of the reward model in RLHF that enables extraction of the corresponding optimal
                                                      policy in closed form, allowing us to solve the standard RLHF problem with only a
                                                      simple classification loss. The resulting algorithm, which we call Direct Prefer-
                                                      ence Optimization (DPO), is stable, performant, and computationally lightweight,
                                                      eliminating the need for sampling from the LM during fine-tuning or performing
                                                      significant hyperparameter tuning. Our experiments show that DPO can fine-tune
                                                      LMs to align with human preferences as well as or better than existing methods.
                                                      Notably, fine-tuning with DPO exceeds PPO-based RLHF in ability to control sen-
                                                      timent of generations, and matches or improves response quality in summarization
                                                      and single-turn dialogue while being substantially simpler to implement and train.


                                         1       Introduction

                                         Large unsupervised language models (LMs) trained on very large datasets acquire surprising capabili-
                                         ties [11, 7, 42, 8]. However, these models are trained on data generated by humans with a wide variety
                                         of goals, priorities, and skillsets. Some of these goals and skillsets may not be desirable to imitate; for
                                         example, while we may want our AI coding assistant to understand common programming mistakes
                                         in order to correct them, nevertheless, when generating code, we would like to bias our model toward
                                         the (potentially rare) high-quality coding ability present in its training data. Similarly, we might want
                                         our language model to be aware of a common misconception believed by 50% of people, but we
                                         certainly do not want the model to claim this misconception to be true in 50% of queries about it!
                                         In other words, selecting the model’s desired responses and behavior from its very wide knowledge
                                         and abilities is crucial to building AI systems that are safe, performant, and controllable [28]. While
                                         existing methods typically steer LMs to match human preferences using reinforcement learning (RL),
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal contribution; more junior authors listed earlier.

                                         37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
