ORIGINAL LINES 350-385
et al., 2022) that specify directions for the AI community to improve upon (Spärck Jones and
Galliers, 1995; Spärck Jones, 2005; Kiela et al., 2021; Bowman and Dahl, 2021; Raji et al., 2021).
When implemented and interpreted appropriately, they enable the broader community to better
understand AI technology and influence its trajectory.
In recent years, the AI technology that has arguably advanced the most is foundation models
(Bommasani et al., 2021), headlined by the rise of language models (LMs; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022). At its core, a language model
is a box that takes in text and generates text (Figure 1). Despite their simplicity, when these models
are trained on broad data at immense scale, they can be adapted (e.g. prompted or fine-tuned) to
myriad downstream scenarios. Yet the immense surface of model capabilities, limitations, and risks
remains poorly understood. The rapid development, rising impact, and inadequate understanding
demand that we benchmark language models holistically.
But what does it mean to benchmark language models holistically? Language models are generalpurposes text interfaces that could be applied across a vast expanse of scenarios. And for each
scenario, we may have a broad set of desiderata: models should be accurate, robust, fair, efficient,
and so on. In fact, the relative importance of these desiderata often will depend not only on the
perspective and values one has, but the scenario itself (e.g. inference efficiency might be of greater
importance in mobile applications).
We believe holistic evaluation involves three elements:
(1) Broad coverage and recognition of incompleteness. Given language models’ vast surface
of capabilities and risks, we need to evaluate language models over a broad range of scenarios.
Broadening the evaluation has been a continuing trend in the NLP community, going from
individual datasets such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) to small collections of datasets
such as SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019b) to large collections of datasets such as the GPT-3
evaluation suite (Brown et al., 2020), Eleuther AI LM Harness (Gao et al., 2021b), and BIGBench (Srivastava et al., 2022). However, it is neither possible to consider all the scenarios nor
all the desiderata that (could) pertain to LMs. Therefore, holistic evaluation should provide a
top-down taxonomy and make explicit all the major scenarios and metrics that are missing.
(2) Multi-metric measurement. Societally beneficial systems reflect many values, not just
accuracy. Holistic evaluation should represent these plural desiderata, evaluating every
desideratum for each scenario considered.
(3) Standardization. Our object of evaluation is the language model, not a scenario-specific
system. Therefore, in order to meaningfully compare different LMs, the strategy for adapting
an LM to a scenario should be controlled for. Furthermore, each LM should be evaluated on
the same scenarios to the extent possible.

Holistic Evaluation of Language Models

