PDF pages 1-1
                                                     Direct Preference Optimization:
                                             Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model


                                                         Rafael Rafailov∗†                   Archit Sharma∗†            Eric Mitchell∗†

                                                       Stefano Ermon†‡                 Christopher D. Manning†             Chelsea Finn†
arXiv:2305.18290v3 [cs.LG] 29 Jul 2024




                                                                                  †
                                                                            Stanford University ‡ CZ Biohub
                                                                {rafailov,architsh,eric.mitchell}@cs.stanford.edu



                                                                                               Abstract

                                                      While large-scale unsupervised language models (LMs) learn broad world knowl-
                                                      edge and some reasoning skills, achieving precise control of their behavior is
                                                      difficult due to the completely unsupervised nature of their training. Existing
                                                      methods for gaining such steerability collect human labels of the relative quality of
                                                      model generations and fine-tune the unsupervised LM to align with these prefer-
                                                      ences, often with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However,
                                                      RLHF is a complex and often unstable procedure, first fitting a reward model that
                                                      reflects the human preferences, and then fine-tuning the large unsupervised LM
                                                      using reinforcement learning to maximize this estimated reward without drifting
                                                      too far from the original model. In this paper we introduce a new parameterization
                                                      of the reward model in RLHF that enables extraction of the corresponding optimal
                                                      policy in closed form, allowing us to solve the standard RLHF problem with only a
                                                      simple classification loss. The resulting algorithm, which we call Direct Prefer-
                                                      ence Optimization (DPO), is stable, performant, and computationally lightweight,
                                                      eliminating the need for sampling from the LM during fine-tuning or performing
                                                      significant hyperparameter tuning. Our experiments show that DPO can fine-tune
                                                      LMs to align with human preferences as well as or better than existing methods.
                                                      Notably, fine-tuning with DPO exceeds PPO-based RLHF in ability to control sen-
                                                      timent of generations, and matches or improves response quality in summarization
                                                      and single-turn dialogue while being substantially simpler to implement and train.


                                         1       Introduction

                                         Large unsupervised language models (LMs) trained on very large datasets acquire surprising capabili-
                                         ties [11, 7, 42, 8]. However, these models are trained on data generated by humans with a wide variety
                                         of goals, priorities, and skillsets. Some of these goals and skillsets may not be desirable to imitate; for
                                         example, while we may want our AI coding assistant to understand common programming mistakes
                                         in order to correct them, nevertheless, when generating code, we would like to bias our model toward
                                         the (potentially rare) high-quality coding ability present in its training data. Similarly, we might want
                                         our language model to be aware of a common misconception believed by 50% of people, but we
                                         certainly do not want the model to claim this misconception to be true in 50% of queries about it!
                                         In other words, selecting the model’s desired responses and behavior from its very wide knowledge
                                         and abilities is crucial to building AI systems that are safe, performant, and controllable [28]. While
                                         existing methods typically steer LMs to match human preferences using reinforcement learning (RL),
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal contribution; more junior authors listed earlier.

                                         37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

PDF pages 3-5
Bradley-Terry model [5], then fine-tune a language model to maximize the given reward using
reinforcement learning algorithms, commonly REINFORCE [47], proximal policy optimization
(PPO; [39]), or variants [34]. A closely-related line of work leverages LLMs fine-tuned for instruction
following with human feedback to generate additional synthetic preference data for targeted attributes
such as safety or harmlessness [2], using only weak supervision from humans in the form of a
text rubric for the LLM’s annotations. These methods represent a convergence of two bodies of
work: one body of work on training language models with reinforcement learning for a variety
of objectives [35, 29, 48] and another body of work on general methods for learning from human
preferences [12, 21]. Despite the appeal of using relative human preferences, fine-tuning large
language models with reinforcement learning remains a major practical challenge; this work provides
a theoretically-justified approach to optimizing relative preferences without RL.
Outside of the context of language, learning policies from preferences has been studied in both bandit
and reinforcement learning settings, and several approaches have been proposed. Contextual bandit
learning using preferences or rankings of actions, rather than rewards, is known as a contextual
dueling bandit (CDB; [50, 14]). In the absence of absolute rewards, theoretical analysis of CDBs
substitutes the notion of an optimal policy with a von Neumann winner, a policy whose expected win
rate against any other policy is at least 50% [14]. However, in the CDB setting, preference labels
are given online, while in learning from human preferences, we typically learn from a fixed batch of
offline preference-annotated action pairs [49]. Similarly, preference-based RL (PbRL) learns from
binary preferences generated by an unknown ‘scoring’ function rather than rewards [9, 37]. Various
algorithms for PbRL exist, including methods that can reuse off-policy preference data, but generally
involve first explicitly estimating the latent scoring function (i.e. the reward model) and subsequently
optimizing it [16, 9, 12, 36, 21]. We instead present a single stage policy learning approach that
directly optimizes a policy to satisfy preferences.

3   Preliminaries
We review the RLHF pipeline in Ziegler et al. (and later [40, 1, 28]). It usually includes three phases:
1) supervised fine-tuning (SFT); 2) preference sampling and reward learning and 3) RL optimization.
SFT: RLHF typically begins by fine-tuning a pre-trained LM with supervised learning on high-quality
data for the downstream task(s) of interest (dialogue, summarization, etc.), to obtain a model π SFT .
Reward Modelling Phase: In the second phase the SFT model is prompted with prompts x to
produce pairs of answers (y1 , y2 ) ∼ π SFT (y | x). These are then presented to human labelers
who express preferences for one answer, denoted as yw ≻ yl | x where yw and yl denotes the
preferred and dispreferred completion amongst (y1 , y2 ) respectively. The preferences are assumed
to be generated by some latent reward model r∗ (y, x), which we do not have access to. There are a
number of approaches used to model preferences, the Bradley-Terry (BT) [5] model being a popular
choice (although more general Plackett-Luce ranking models [32, 23] are also compatible with the
framework if we have access to several ranked answers). The BT model stipulates that the human
preference distribution p∗ can be written as:
                                                     exp (r∗ (x, y1 ))
                        p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) =                                        .                  (1)
                                             exp (r (x, y1 )) + exp (r∗ (x, y2 ))
                                                   ∗

                                                                 (i) (i) N
Assuming access to a static dataset of comparisons D = x(i) , yw , yl i=1 sampled from p∗ , we
                                                         

can parametrize a reward model rϕ (x, y) and estimate the parameters via maximum likelihood.
Framing the problem as a binary classification we have the negative log-likelihood loss:
                                                                                
                  LR (rϕ , D) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ(rϕ (x, yw ) − rϕ (x, yl ))            (2)
where σ is the logistic function. In the context of LMs, the network rϕ (x, y) is often initialized from
the SFT model π SFT (y | x) with the addition of a linear layer on top of the final transformer layer
that produces a single scalar prediction for the reward value [51]. To ensure a reward function with
lower variance, prior works normalize the rewards, such that Ex,y∼D [rϕ (x, y)] = 0 for all x.
RL Fine-Tuning Phase: During the RL phase, the learned reward function is used to provide
feedback to the language model. Following prior works [17, 18], the optimization is formulated as
                                                                             
                 max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) rϕ (x, y) − βDKL πθ (y | x) || πref (y | x) ,             (3)
                   πθ


                                                    3
where β is a parameter controlling the deviation from the base reference policy πref , namely the ini-
tial SFT model π SFT . In practice, the language model policy πθ is also initialized to π SFT . The
added constraint is important, as it prevents the model from deviating too far from the distri-
bution on which the reward model is accurate, as well as maintaining the generation diversity
and preventing mode-collapse to single high-reward answers. Due to the discrete nature of lan-
guage generation, this objective is not differentiable and is typically optimized with reinforce-
ment learning. The standard approach [51, 40, 1, 28] has been to construct the reward function
r(x, y) = rϕ (x, y) − β(log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x)), and maximize using PPO [39].

4   Direct Preference Optimization
Motivated by the challenges of applying reinforcement learning algorithms on large-scale problems
such as fine-tuning language models, our goal is to derive a simple approach for policy optimization
using preferences directly. Unlike prior RLHF methods, which learn a reward and then optimize it
via RL, our approach leverages a particular choice of reward model parameterization that enables
extraction of its optimal policy in closed form, without an RL training loop. As we will describe
next in detail, our key insight is to leverage an analytical mapping from reward functions to optimal
policies, which enables us to transform a loss function over reward functions into a loss function
over policies. This change-of-variables approach avoids fitting an explicit, standalone reward model,
while still optimizing under existing models of human preferences, such as the Bradley-Terry model.
In essence, the policy network represents both the language model and the (implicit) reward.
Deriving the DPO objective. We start with the same RL objective as prior work, Eq. 3, under a
general reward function r. Following prior work [31, 30, 19, 15], it is straightforward to show that
the optimal solution to the KL-constrained reward maximization objective in Eq. 3 takes the form:
                                                                           
                                            1                      1
                             πr (y | x) =       πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y) ,                     (4)
                                          Z(x)                     β
                                                
where Z(x) = y πref (y | x) exp β1 r(x, y) is the partition function. See Appendix A.1 for a
                  P

complete derivation. Even if we use the MLE estimate rϕ of the ground-truth reward function r∗ , it is
still expensive to estimate the partition function Z(x) [19, 15], which makes this representation hard
to utilize in practice. However, we can rearrange Eq. 4 to express the reward function in terms of its
corresponding optimal policy πr , the reference policy πref , and the unknown partition function Z(·).
Specifically, we first take the logarithm of both sides of Eq. 4 and then with some algebra we obtain:
                                                πr (y | x)
                              r(x, y) = β log                + β log Z(x).                          (5)
                                                πref (y | x)
We can apply this reparameterization to the ground-truth reward r∗ and corresponding optimal model
π ∗ . Fortunately, the Bradley-Terry model depends only on the difference of rewards between two
completions, i.e., p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) = σ(r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 )). Substituting the reparameterization
in Eq. 5 for r∗ (x, y) into the preference model Eq. 1, the partition function cancels, and we can
express the human preference probability in terms of only the optimal policy π ∗ and reference policy
πref . Thus, the optimal RLHF policy π ∗ under the Bradley-Terry model satisfies the preference model:
                                                                   1
                   p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) =                         ∗
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                                   2 |x)         π ∗ (y1 |x)
                                        1 + exp       β log ππref(y
                                                                 (y2 |x) − β log πref (y1 |x)

The derivation is in Appendix A.2. While Eq. 6 uses the Bradley-Terry model, we can similarly
derive expressions under the more general Plackett-Luce models [32, 23], shown in Appendix A.3.
Now that we have the probability of human preference data in terms of the optimal policy rather than
the reward model, we can formulate a maximum likelihood objective for a parametrized policy πθ .
Analogous to the reward modeling approach (i.e. Eq. 2), our policy objective becomes:
                                                                                         
                                                       πθ (yw | x)           πθ (yl | x)
       LDPO (πθ ; πref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ β log               − β log                  .   (7)
                                                       πref (yw | x)         πref (yl | x)
This way, we fit an implicit reward using an alternative parameterization, whose optimal policy is
simply πθ . Moreover, since our procedure is equivalent to fitting a reparametrized Bradley-Terry


                                                       4
model, it enjoys certain theoretical properties, such as consistencies under suitable assumption of the
preference data distribution [4]. In Section 5, we further discuss theoretical properties of DPO in
relation to other works.
What does the DPO update do? For a mechanistic understanding of DPO, it is useful to analyze the
gradient of the loss function LDPO . The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:

    ∇θ LDPO (πθ ; πref ) =
                                                                                                             
    − βE(x,yw ,yl )∼D      σ(r̂θ (x, yl ) − r̂θ (x, yw ))                  ∇θ log π(yw | x) − ∇θ log π(yl | x) ,
                           |             {z             }                  |      {z      }   |     {z       }
                         higher weight when reward estimate is wrong       increase likelihood of yw   decrease likelihood of yl

where r̂θ (x, y) = β log ππrefθ (y|x)
                                (y|x) is the reward implicitly defined by the language model πθ and refer-
ence model πref (more in Section 5). Intuitively, the gradient of the loss function LDPO increases the
likelihood of the preferred completions yw and decreases the likelihood of dispreferred completions
yl . Importantly, the examples are weighed by how much higher the implicit reward model r̂θ rates
the dispreferred completions, scaled by β, i.e, how incorrectly the implicit reward model orders
the completions, accounting for the strength of the KL constraint. Our experiments suggest the
importance of this weighting, as a naïve version of this method without the weighting coefficient can
cause the language model to degenerate (Appendix Table 3).
DPO outline. The general DPO pipeline is as follows: 1) Sample completions y1 , y2 ∼ πref (· | x)
for every prompt x, label with human preferences to construct the offline dataset of preferences
              (i)
D = {x(i) , yw , yl )(i) }N
                          i=1 and 2) optimize the language model πθ to minimize LDPO for the given
πref and D and desired β. In practice, one would like to reuse preference datasets publicly available,
rather than generating samples and gathering human preferences. Since the preference datasets
are sampled using π SFT , we initialize πref = π SFT whenever available. However, when π SFT is
not available, we initialize πref by maximizing likelihood of preferred completions (x, yw ), that
is, πref = arg maxπ Ex,yw ∼D [log π(yw | x)]. This procedure helps mitigate the distribution shift
between the true reference distribution which is unavailable, and πref used by DPO. Further details
related to the implementation and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix B.

5     Theoretical Analysis of DPO
In this section, we give further interpretation of the DPO method, provide theoretical backing, and
relate advantages of DPO to issues with actor critic algorithms used for RLHF (such as PPO [39]).

5.1     Your Language Model Is Secretly a Reward Model

DPO is able to bypass both fitting an explicit reward and performing RL to learn the policy using
a single maximum likelihood objective. Note the optimization objective Eq. 5 is equivalent to a
                                                                        π ∗ (y|x)
Bradley-Terry model with a reward parameterization r∗ (x, y) = β log πrefθ (y|x) and we optimize our
parametric model πθ , equivalently to the reward model optimization in Eq. 2 under the change of
variables. In this section we will build the theory behind this reparameterization, show that it does
not constrain the class of learned reward models, and allows for the exact recovery of the optimal
policy. We begin with by defining an equivalence relation between reward functions.
Definition 1. We say that two reward functions r(x, y) and r′ (x, y) are equivalent iff
r(x, y) − r′ (x, y) = f (x) for some function f .

It is easy to see that this is indeed an equivalence relation, which partitions the set of reward functions
into classes. We can state the following two lemmas:
Lemma 1. Under the Plackett-Luce, and in particular the Bradley-Terry, preference framework, two
reward functions from the same class induce the same preference distribution.
Lemma 2. Two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same optimal policy
under the constrained RL problem.

The proofs are straightforward and we defer them to Appendix A.5. The first lemma is a well-known
under-specification issue with the Plackett-Luce family of models [32]. Due to this under-specification,


                                                               5
