                                                    Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network


                                                  Geoffrey Hinton∗ †                          Oriol Vinyals†                     Jeff Dean
                                                    Google Inc.                                Google Inc.                       Google Inc.
arXiv:1503.02531v1 [stat.ML] 9 Mar 2015




                                                   Mountain View                              Mountain View                    Mountain View
                                             geoffhinton@google.com                       vinyals@google.com                 jeff@google.com



                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      A very simple way to improve the performance of almost any machine learning
                                                      algorithm is to train many different models on the same data and then to average
                                                      their predictions [3]. Unfortunately, making predictions using a whole ensemble
                                                      of models is cumbersome and may be too computationally expensive to allow de-
                                                      ployment to a large number of users, especially if the individual models are large
                                                      neural nets. Caruana and his collaborators [1] have shown that it is possible to
                                                      compress the knowledge in an ensemble into a single model which is much eas-
                                                      ier to deploy and we develop this approach further using a different compression
                                                      technique. We achieve some surprising results on MNIST and we show that we
                                                      can significantly improve the acoustic model of a heavily used commercial system
                                                      by distilling the knowledge in an ensemble of models into a single model. We also
                                                      introduce a new type of ensemble composed of one or more full models and many
                                                      specialist models which learn to distinguish fine-grained classes that the full mod-
                                                      els confuse. Unlike a mixture of experts, these specialist models can be trained
                                                      rapidly and in parallel.


                                          1 Introduction
                                          Many insects have a larval form that is optimized for extracting energy and nutrients from the envi-
                                          ronment and a completely different adult form that is optimized for the very different requirements
                                          of traveling and reproduction. In large-scale machine learning, we typically use very similar models
                                          for the training stage and the deployment stage despite their very different requirements: For tasks
                                          like speech and object recognition, training must extract structure from very large, highly redundant
                                          datasets but it does not need to operate in real time and it can use a huge amount of computation.
                                          Deployment to a large number of users, however, has much more stringent requirements on latency
                                          and computational resources. The analogy with insects suggests that we should be willing to train
                                          very cumbersome models if that makes it easier to extract structure from the data. The cumbersome
                                          model could be an ensemble of separately trained models or a single very large model trained with
                                          a very strong regularizer such as dropout [9]. Once the cumbersome model has been trained, we
                                          can then use a different kind of training, which we call “distillation” to transfer the knowledge from
                                          the cumbersome model to a small model that is more suitable for deployment. A version of this
                                          strategy has already been pioneered by Rich Caruana and his collaborators [1]. In their important
                                          paper they demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acquired by a large ensemble of models
                                          can be transferred to a single small model.
                                          A conceptual block that may have prevented more investigation of this very promising approach is
                                          that we tend to identify the knowledge in a trained model with the learned parameter values and this
                                          makes it hard to see how we can change the form of the model but keep the same knowledge. A more
                                          abstract view of the knowledge, that frees it from any particular instantiation, is that it is a learned
                                             ∗
                                                 Also affiliated with the University of Toronto and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
                                             †
                                                 Equal contribution.


                                                                                                  1
mapping from input vectors to output vectors. For cumbersome models that learn to discriminate
between a large number of classes, the normal training objective is to maximize the average log
probability of the correct answer, but a side-effect of the learning is that the trained model assigns
probabilities to all of the incorrect answers and even when these probabilities are very small, some
of them are much larger than others. The relative probabilities of incorrect answers tell us a lot about
how the cumbersome model tends to generalize. An image of a BMW, for example, may only have
a very small chance of being mistaken for a garbage truck, but that mistake is still many times more
probable than mistaking it for a carrot.
It is generally accepted that the objective function used for training should reflect the true objective
of the user as closely as possible. Despite this, models are usually trained to optimize performance
on the training data when the real objective is to generalize well to new data. It would clearly
be better to train models to generalize well, but this requires information about the correct way to
generalize and this information is not normally available. When we are distilling the knowledge
from a large model into a small one, however, we can train the small model to generalize in the same
way as the large model. If the cumbersome model generalizes well because, for example, it is the
average of a large ensemble of different models, a small model trained to generalize in the same way
will typically do much better on test data than a small model that is trained in the normal way on the
same training set as was used to train the ensemble.
An obvious way to transfer the generalization ability of the cumbersome model to a small model is
to use the class probabilities produced by the cumbersome model as “soft targets” for training the
small model. For this transfer stage, we could use the same training set or a separate “transfer” set.
When the cumbersome model is a large ensemble of simpler models, we can use an arithmetic or
geometric mean of their individual predictive distributions as the soft targets. When the soft targets
have high entropy, they provide much more information per training case than hard targets and much
less variance in the gradient between training cases, so the small model can often be trained on much
less data than the original cumbersome model and using a much higher learning rate.
For tasks like MNIST in which the cumbersome model almost always produces the correct answer
with very high confidence, much of the information about the learned function resides in the ratios
of very small probabilities in the soft targets. For example, one version of a 2 may be given a
probability of 10−6 of being a 3 and 10−9 of being a 7 whereas for another version it may be the
other way around. This is valuable information that defines a rich similarity structure over the data
(i. e. it says which 2’s look like 3’s and which look like 7’s) but it has very little influence on the
cross-entropy cost function during the transfer stage because the probabilities are so close to zero.
Caruana and his collaborators circumvent this problem by using the logits (the inputs to the final
softmax) rather than the probabilities produced by the softmax as the targets for learning the small
model and they minimize the squared difference between the logits produced by the cumbersome
model and the logits produced by the small model. Our more general solution, called “distillation”,
is to raise the temperature of the final softmax until the cumbersome model produces a suitably soft
set of targets. We then use the same high temperature when training the small model to match these
soft targets. We show later that matching the logits of the cumbersome model is actually a special
case of distillation.
The transfer set that is used to train the small model could consist entirely of unlabeled data [1]
or we could use the original training set. We have found that using the original training set works
well, especially if we add a small term to the objective function that encourages the small model
to predict the true targets as well as matching the soft targets provided by the cumbersome model.
Typically, the small model cannot exactly match the soft targets and erring in the direction of the
correct answer turns out to be helpful.


2 Distillation

Neural networks typically produce class probabilities by using a “softmax” output layer that converts
the logit, zi , computed for each class into a probability, qi , by comparing zi with the other logits.

                                              exp(zi /T )
                                        qi = P                                                      (1)
                                              j exp(zj /T )


                                                   2
where T is a temperature that is normally set to 1. Using a higher value for T produces a softer
probability distribution over classes.
In the simplest form of distillation, knowledge is transferred to the distilled model by training it on
a transfer set and using a soft target distribution for each case in the transfer set that is produced by
using the cumbersome model with a high temperature in its softmax. The same high temperature is
used when training the distilled model, but after it has been trained it uses a temperature of 1.
When the correct labels are known for all or some of the transfer set, this method can be significantly
improved by also training the distilled model to produce the correct labels. One way to do this is
to use the correct labels to modify the soft targets, but we found that a better way is to simply use
a weighted average of two different objective functions. The first objective function is the cross
entropy with the soft targets and this cross entropy is computed using the same high temperature in
the softmax of the distilled model as was used for generating the soft targets from the cumbersome
model. The second objective function is the cross entropy with the correct labels. This is computed
using exactly the same logits in softmax of the distilled model but at a temperature of 1. We found
that the best results were generally obtained by using a condiderably lower weight on the second
objective function. Since the magnitudes of the gradients produced by the soft targets scale as 1/T 2
it is important to multiply them by T 2 when using both hard and soft targets. This ensures that the
relative contributions of the hard and soft targets remain roughly unchanged if the temperature used
for distillation is changed while experimenting with meta-parameters.

2.1 Matching logits is a special case of distillation

Each case in the transfer set contributes a cross-entropy gradient, dC/dzi , with respect to each
logit, zi of the distilled model. If the cumbersome model has logits vi which produce soft target
probabilities pi and the transfer training is done at a temperature of T , this gradient is given by:
                                                                               !
                          ∂C     1               1       ezi /T      evi /T
                              = (qi − pi ) =          P z /T − P v /T                                 (2)
                          ∂zi   T                T       je
                                                              j
                                                                      je
                                                                           j




If the temperature is high compared with the magnitude of the logits, we can approximate:
                                                                       !
                           ∂C    1      1 + zi /T         1 + vi /T
                               ≈           P        −        P                                       (3)
                           ∂zi   T N + j zj /T         N + j vj /T

If
Pwe nowPassume that the logits have been zero-meaned separately for each transfer case so that
   j zj = j vj = 0 Eq. 3 simplifies to:

                                        ∂C     1
                                            ≈      (zi − vi )                                        (4)
                                        ∂zi   NT 2
So in the high temperature limit, distillation is equivalent to minimizing 1/2(zi − vi )2 , provided the
logits are zero-meaned separately for each transfer case. At lower temperatures, distillation pays
much less attention to matching logits that are much more negative than the average. This is poten-
tially advantageous because these logits are almost completely unconstrained by the cost function
used for training the cumbersome model so they could be very noisy. On the other hand, the very
negative logits may convey useful information about the knowledge acquired by the cumbersome
model. Which of these effects dominates is an empirical question. We show that when the distilled
