6.4

Validating GPT-4 judgments with human judgments

We conduct a human study to verify the reliability of GPT-4’s judgments, using the results of
the TL;DR summarization experiment and two different GPT-4 prompts. The GPT-4 (S) (simple) prompt simply asks for which summary better-summarizes the important information in the
post. The GPT-4 (C) (concise) prompt also asks for which summary is more concise; we evaluate this prompt because we find that GPT-4 prefers longer, more repetitive summaries than humans do with the GPT-4 (S) prompt. See Appendix C.2 for the complete prompts. We perform
three comparisons, using the highest (DPO, temp. 0.25), the lowest (PPO, temp. 1.0), and a
middle-performing (SFT, temp. 0.25) method with
the aim of covering a diversity of sample qualities;
DPO SFT PPO-1
all three methods are compared against greedilyN respondents
272
122
199
sampled PPO (its best-performing temperature).
GPT-4 (S) win %
47
27
13
We find that with both prompts, GPT-4 tends to
GPT-4 (C) win %
54
32
12
agree with humans about as often as humans agree
Human win %
58
43
17
with each other, suggesting that GPT-4 is a reasonable proxy for human evaluations (due to limited
GPT-4 (S)-H agree
70
77
86
human raters, we only collect multiple human judgGPT-4 (C)-H agree
67
79
85
H-H agree
65
87
ments for the DPO and PPO-1 comparisons). Overall, the GPT-4 (C) prompt generally provides win Table 2: Comparing human and GPT-4 win rates
rates more representative of humans; we therefore and per-judgment agreement on TL;DR summarizause this prompt for the main results in Section 6.2. tion samples. Humans agree with GPT-4 about as
For additional details about the human study, in- much as they agree with each other. Each expericluding the web interface presented to raters and ment compares a summary from the stated method
the list of human volunteers, see Appendix D.3.
with a summary from PPO with temperature 0.

7

Discussion

Learning from preferences is a powerful, scalable framework for training capable, aligned language
models. We have introduced DPO, a simple training paradigm for training language models from
preferences without reinforcement learning. Rather than coercing the preference learning problem
into a standard RL setting in order to use off-the-shelf RL algorithms, DPO identifies a mapping
between language model policies and reward functions that enables training a language model to
satisfy human preferences directly, with a simple cross-entropy loss, without reinforcement learning
or loss of generality. With virtually no tuning of hyperparameters, DPO performs similarly or better
than existing RLHF algorithms, including those based on PPO; DPO thus meaningfully reduces the
barrier to training more language models from human preferences.
Limitations & Future Work. Our results raise several important questions for future work. How
does the DPO policy generalize out of distribution, compared with learning from an explicit reward
function? Our initial results suggest that DPO policies can generalize similarly to PPO-based models,
but more comprehensive study is needed. For example, can training with self-labeling from the
DPO policy similarly make effective use of unlabeled prompts? On another front, how does reward
over-optimization manifest in the direct preference optimization setting, and is the slight decrease
in performance in Figure 3-right an instance of it? Additionally, while we evaluate models up to
6B parameters, exploration of scaling DPO to state-of-the-art models orders of magnitude larger is
an exciting direction for future work. Regarding evaluations, we find that the win rates computed
by GPT-4 are impacted by the prompt; future work may study the best way to elicit high-quality
judgments from automated systems. Finally, many possible applications of DPO exist beyond training
language models from human preferences, including training generative models in other modalities.

Acknowledgements
EM gratefully acknowledges funding from a Knight-Hennessy Graduate Fellowship. CF and CM
are CIFAR Fellows. This work was supported in part by the Stanford Accelerator for Learning
(SAL) and Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) Generative AI for the
Future of Learning seed grant program. The Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models
(CRFM) provided part of the compute resources used for the experiments in this work. This work
was supported in part by ONR grant N00014-20-1-2675.
10

