                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




                                         R E A C T : S YNERGIZING R EASONING AND ACTING IN
                                         L ANGUAGE M ODELS

                                         Shunyu Yao∗*,1 , Jeffrey Zhao2 , Dian Yu2 , Nan Du2 , Izhak Shafran2 , Karthik Narasimhan1 , Yuan Cao2
                                                                  1
                                                                Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
                                                                          2
                                                                            Google Research, Brain team
                                                                  1
                                                                    {shunyuy,karthikn}@princeton.edu
                                                       2
                                                         {jeffreyzhao,dianyu,dunan,izhak,yuancao}@google.com
arXiv:2210.03629v3 [cs.CL] 10 Mar 2023




                                                                                        A BSTRACT

                                                     While large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance
                                                     across tasks in language understanding and interactive decision making, their
                                                     abilities for reasoning (e.g. chain-of-thought prompting) and acting (e.g. action
                                                     plan generation) have primarily been studied as separate topics. In this paper, we
                                                     explore the use of LLMs to generate both reasoning traces and task-specific actions
                                                     in an interleaved manner, allowing for greater synergy between the two: reasoning
                                                     traces help the model induce, track, and update action plans as well as handle
                                                     exceptions, while actions allow it to interface with and gather additional information
                                                     from external sources such as knowledge bases or environments. We apply our
                                                     approach, named ReAct, to a diverse set of language and decision making tasks
                                                     and demonstrate its effectiveness over state-of-the-art baselines in addition to
                                                     improved human interpretability and trustworthiness. Concretely, on question
                                                     answering (HotpotQA) and fact verification (Fever), ReAct overcomes prevalent
                                                     issues of hallucination and error propagation in chain-of-thought reasoning by
                                                     interacting with a simple Wikipedia API, and generating human-like task-solving
                                                     trajectories that are more interpretable than baselines without reasoning traces.
                                                     Furthermore, on two interactive decision making benchmarks (ALFWorld and
                                                     WebShop), ReAct outperforms imitation and reinforcement learning methods by
                                                     an absolute success rate of 34% and 10% respectively, while being prompted with
                                                     only one or two in-context examples.


                                         2       R E A C T : S YNERGIZING R E ASONING + A C T ING
Consider a general setup of an agent interacting with an environment for task solving. At time
step t, an agent receives an observation ot ∈ O from the environment and takes an action at ∈ A
following some policy π(at |ct ), where ct = (o1 , a1 , · · · , ot−1 , at−1 , ot ) is the context to the agent.
Learning a policy is challenging when the mapping ct 7→ at is highly implicit and requires extensive
computation. For example, the agent shown in Figure 1(1c) is unable to generate the correct final
action (Act 4) to finish the QA task as it requires complex reasoning over the trajectory context
(Question, Act 1-3, Obs 1-3). Similarly, the agent shown in Figure 1(2a) fails to comprehend from the
context that sinkbasin 1 does not contain peppershaker 1, thus keep producing hallucinating actions.
The idea of ReAct is simple: we augment the agent’s action space to Â = A ∪ L, where L is the
space of language. An action ât ∈ L in the language space, which we will refer to as a thought or a
reasoning trace, does not affect the external environment, thus leading to no observation feedback.
Instead, a thought ât aims to compose useful information by reasoning over the current context ct ,
and update the context ct+1 = (ct , ât ) to support future reasoning or acting. As shown in Figure 1,
there could be various types of useful thoughts, e.g. decomposing task goals and create action plans
(2b, Act 1; 1d, Thought 1), injecting commonsense knowledge relevant to task solving (2b, Act 1),
extracting important parts from observations (1d, Thought2, 4), track progress and transit action plans
(2b, Act 8), handle exceptions and adjust action plans (1d, Thought 3), and so on.
However, as the language space L is unlimited, learning in this augmented action space is difficult
and requires strong language priors. In this paper, we mainly focus on the setup where a frozen
large language model, PaLM-540B (Chowdhery et al., 2022)1 , is prompted with few-shot in-context
examples to generate both domain-specific actions and free-form language thoughts for task solving
(Figure 1 (1d), (2b)). Each in-context example is a human trajectory of actions, thoughts, and
environment observations to solve a task instance (see Appendix C). For the tasks where reasoning is
of primary importance (Figure 1(1)), we alternate the generation of thoughts and actions so that the
task-solving trajectory consists of multiple thought-action-observation steps. In contrast, for decision
making tasks that potentially involve a large number of actions (Figure 1(2)), thoughts only need to
    1
        We show some GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) results in Appendix A.1, which outperforms PaLM-540B.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




appear sparsely in the most relevant positions of a trajectory, so we let the language model decide the
asynchronous occurrence of thoughts and actions for itself.
Since decision making and reasoning capabilities are integrated into a large language model, ReAct
enjoys several unique features: A) Intuitive and easy to design: Designing ReAct prompts is
straightforward as human annotators just type down their thoughts in language on top of their actions
taken. No ad-hoc format choice, thought design, or example selection is used in this paper. We detail
prompt design for each task in Sections 3 and 4. B) General and flexible: Due to the flexible thought
space and thought-action occurrence format, ReAct works for diverse tasks with distinct action
spaces and reasoning needs, including but not limited to QA, fact verification, text game, and web
navigation. C) Performant and robust: ReAct shows strong generalization to new task instances
while learning solely from one to six in-context examples, consistently outperforming baselines with
only reasoning or acting across different domains. We also show in Section 3 additional benefits
when finetuning is enabled, and in Section 4 how ReAct performance is robust to prompt selections.
D) Human aligned and controllable: ReAct promises an interpretable sequential decision making
and reasoning process where humans can easily inspect reasoning and factual correctness. Moreover,
humans can also control or correct the agent behavior on the go by thought editing, as shown in
Figure 5 in Section 4.


