ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 119-154:

2      Methods
We explore RAG models, which use the input sequence x to retrieve text documents z and use them
as additional context when generating the target sequence y. As shown in Figure 1, our models
leverage two components: (i) a retriever pη (z|x) with parameters η that returns (top-K truncated)
distributions over text passages given a query x and (ii) a generator pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 ) parametrized
    1
      Code to run experiments with RAG has been open-sourced as part of the HuggingFace Transform-
ers Library [66] and can be found at https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/
examples/rag/. An interactive demo of RAG models can be found at https://huggingface.co/rag/


                                                                   2

by θ that generates a current token based on a context of the previous i − 1 tokens y1:i−1 , the original
input x and a retrieved passage z.
To train the retriever and generator end-to-end, we treat the retrieved document as a latent variable.
We propose two models that marginalize over the latent documents in different ways to produce a
distribution over generated text. In one approach, RAG-Sequence, the model uses the same document
to predict each target token. The second approach, RAG-Token, can predict each target token based
on a different document. In the following, we formally introduce both models and then describe the
pη and pθ components, as well as the training and decoding procedure.

2.1   Models

RAG-Sequence Model The RAG-Sequence model uses the same retrieved document to generate
the complete sequence. Technically, it treats the retrieved document as a single latent variable that
is marginalized to get the seq2seq probability p(y|x) via a top-K approximation. Concretely, the
top K documents are retrieved using the retriever, and the generator produces the output sequence
probability for each document, which are then marginalized,
                                 X                                 X               N
                                                                                   Y
         pRAG-Sequence (y|x) ≈       pη (z|x)pθ (y|x, z) =              pη (z|x)       pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 )
                          z∈top-k(p(·|x))                   z∈top-k(p(·|x))        i



ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 180-201:
Natural Questions [29]. We refer to the document index as the non-parametric memory.

2.3   Generator: BART

The generator component pθ (yi |x, z, y1:i−1 ) could be modelled using any encoder-decoder. We use
BART-large [32], a pre-trained seq2seq transformer [58] with 400M parameters. To combine the input
x with the retrieved content z when generating from BART, we simply concatenate them. BART was
pre-trained using a denoising objective and a variety of different noising functions. It has obtained
state-of-the-art results on a diverse set of generation tasks and outperforms comparably-sized T5
models [32]. We refer to the BART generator parameters θ as the parametric memory henceforth.

2.4   Training

We jointly train the retriever and generator components without any direct supervision on what
document should be retrieved. Given a fine-tuning training corpus of input/output pairs (xj , yj ), we


                                                        3

                                                               P
minimize the negative marginal log-likelihood of each target, j − log p(yj |xj ) using stochastic
gradient descent with Adam [28]. Updating the document encoder BERTd during training is costly as

ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 515-537:
within 2.7% of this model, despite being supplied with only the claim and retrieving its own evidence.
We also analyze whether documents retrieved by RAG correspond to documents annotated as gold
evidence in FEVER. We calculate the overlap in article titles between the top k documents retrieved
by RAG and gold evidence annotations. We find that the top retrieved document is from a gold article
in 71% of cases, and a gold article is present in the top 10 retrieved articles in 90% of cases.

4.5     Additional Results

Generation Diversity Section 4.3 shows that RAG models are more factual and specific than
BART for Jeopardy question generation. Following recent work on diversity-promoting decoding
[33, 59, 39], we also investigate generation diversity by calculating the ratio of distinct ngrams to
total ngrams generated by different models. Table 5 shows that RAG-Sequence’s generations are
more diverse than RAG-Token’s, and both are significantly more diverse than BART without needing
any diversity-promoting decoding.

Retrieval Ablations A key feature of RAG is learning to retrieve relevant information for the task.
To assess the effectiveness of the retrieval mechanism, we run ablations where we freeze the retriever
during training. As shown in Table 6, learned retrieval improves results for all tasks.
We compare RAG’s dense retriever to a word overlap-based BM25 retriever [53]. Here, we replace
RAG’s retriever with a fixed BM25 system, and use BM25 retrieval scores as logits when calculating
p(z|x). Table 6 shows the results. For FEVER, BM25 performs best, perhaps since FEVER claims are
heavily entity-centric and thus well-suited for word overlap-based retrieval. Differentiable retrieval
improves results on all other tasks, especially for Open-Domain QA, where it is crucial.

ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 571-575:
            RAG-Sequence-Frozen                  41.2        52.1                            41.8    52.6       11.8        19.6                                      56.7        47.3
            RAG-Token                            43.5        54.8                            46.5    51.9       17.9        22.6                                      56.2        49.4
                                                                                                                                                                                             74.5            90.6
            RAG-Sequence                         44.0        55.8                            44.9    53.4       15.3        21.5                                      57.2        47.5


ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 673-678:
to provide a final output. These approaches have proved successful in a number of domains including
Machine Translation [18, 22] and Semantic Parsing [21]. Our approach does have several differences,
including less of emphasis on lightly editing a retrieved item, but on aggregating content from several
pieces of retrieved content, as well as learning latent retrieval, and retrieving evidence documents
rather than related training pairs. This said, RAG techniques may work well in these settings, and
could represent promising future work.

ORIGINAL pdftotext lines 689-698:
memories interact and how to most effectively combine them, showing promise in being applied to a
wide variety of NLP tasks.




                                                    9

Broader Impact
This work offers several positive societal benefits over previous work: the fact that it is more
