PDF pages 1-4
LIMA: Less Is More for Alignment

Chunting Zhou𝜇∗

arXiv:2305.11206v1 [cs.CL] 18 May 2023

Yuning Mao𝜇

Pengfei Liu𝜋∗

Xuezhe Ma𝜆

Gargi Ghosh𝜇

Puxin Xu𝜇

Avia Efrat𝜏

Mike Lewis𝜇

Srini Iyer𝜇

Ping Yu𝜇

Lili Yu𝜇

Luke Zettlemoyer𝜇

Jiao Sun𝜆
Susan Zhang𝜇

Omer Levy𝜇

𝜇 Meta AI
𝜋 Carnegie Mellon University

𝜆 University of Southern California
𝜏 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Large language models are trained in two stages: (1) unsupervised pretraining from
raw text, to learn general-purpose representations, and (2) large scale instruction
tuning and reinforcement learning, to better align to end tasks and user preferences.
We measure the relative importance of these two stages by training LIMA, a 65B
parameter LLaMa language model fine-tuned with the standard supervised loss on
only 1,000 carefully curated prompts and responses, without any reinforcement
learning or human preference modeling. LIMA demonstrates remarkably strong
performance, learning to follow specific response formats from only a handful of
examples in the training data, including complex queries that range from planning
trip itineraries to speculating about alternate history. Moreover, the model tends
to generalize well to unseen tasks that did not appear in the training data. In a
controlled human study, responses from LIMA are either equivalent or strictly
preferred to GPT-4 in 43% of cases; this statistic is as high as 58% when compared
to Bard and 65% versus DaVinci003, which was trained with human feedback.
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that almost all knowledge in large
language models is learned during pretraining, and only limited instruction tuning
data is necessary to teach models to produce high quality output.

1

Introduction

Language models are pretrained to predict the next token at an incredible scale, allowing them to
learn general-purpose representations that can be transferred to nearly any language understanding
or generation task. To enable this transfer, various methods for aligning language models have thus
been proposed, primarily focusing on instruction tuning [Mishra et al., 2021, Wei et al., 2022a, Sanh
et al., 2022] over large multi-million-example datasets [Chung et al., 2022, Beeching et al., 2023,
Köpf et al., 2023], and more recently reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Bai
et al., 2022a, Ouyang et al., 2022], collected over millions of interactions with human annotators.
Existing alignment methods require significant amounts of compute and specialized data to achieve
ChatGPT-level performance. However, we demonstrate that, given a strong pretrained language
model, remarkably strong performance can be achieved by simply fine-tuning on 1,000 carefully
curated training examples.
We hypothesize that alignment can be a simple process where the model learns the style or format for
interacting with users, to expose the knowledge and capabilities that were already acquired during
Preprint. Under review.

Source

#Examples

Avg Input Len.

Avg Output Len.

Training
Stack Exchange (STEM)
Stack Exchange (Other)
wikiHow
Pushshift r/WritingPrompts
Natural Instructions
Paper Authors (Group A)

200
200
200
150
50
200

117
119
12
34
236
40

523
530
1,811
274
92
334

Dev
Paper Authors (Group A)

50

36

N/A

Test
Pushshift r/AskReddit
Paper Authors (Group B)

70
230

30
31

N/A
N/A

Table 1: Sources of training prompts (inputs) and responses (outputs), and test prompts. The total
amount of training data is roughly 750,000 tokens, split over exactly 1,000 sequences.

pretraining. To test this hypothesis, we curate 1,000 examples that approximate real user prompts and
high-quality responses. We select 750 top questions and answers from community forums, such as
Stack Exchange and wikiHow, sampling for quality and diversity. In addition, we manually write 250
examples of prompts and responses, while optimizing for task diversity and emphasizing a uniform
response style in the spirit of an AI assistant. Finally, we train LIMA, a pretrained 65B-parameter
LLaMa model [Touvron et al., 2023] fine-tuned on this set of 1,000 demonstrations.
We compare LIMA to state-of-the-art language models and products across 300 challenging test
prompts. In a human preference study, we find that LIMA outperforms RLHF-trained DaVinci003
from OpenAI, which was trained with RLHF, as well as a 65B-parameter reproduction of Alpaca
[Taori et al., 2023], which was trained on 52,000 examples. While humans typically prefer responses
from GPT-4, Claude, and Bard over LIMA, this is not always the case; LIMA produces equal or
preferrable responses in 43%, 46%, and 58% of the cases, respectively. Repeating the human preference
annotations with GPT-4 as the annotator corroborates our findings. Analyzing LIMA responses on an
absolute scale reveals that 88% meet the prompt requirements, and 50% are considered excellent.
Ablation experiments reveal vastly diminishing returns when scaling up data quantity without also
scaling up prompt diversity, alongside major gains when optimizing data quality. In addition, despite
having zero dialogue examples, we find that LIMA can conduct coherent multi-turn dialogue, and
that this ability can be dramatically improved by adding only 30 hand-crafted dialogue chains to the
training set. Overall, these remarkable findings demonstrate the power of pretraining and its relative
importance over large-scale instruction tuning and reinforcement learning approaches.

2

Alignment Data

We define the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis: A model’s knowledge and capabilities are learnt
almost entirely during pretraining, while alignment teaches it which subdistribution of formats should
be used when interacting with users. If this hypothesis is correct, and alignment is largely about
learning style, then a corollary of the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis is that one could sufficiently
tune a pretrained language model with a rather small set of examples [Kirstain et al., 2021].
To that end, we collect a dataset of 1,000 prompts and responses, where the outputs (responses) are
stylistically aligned with each other, but the inputs (prompts) are diverse. Specifically, we seek outputs
in the style of a helpful AI assistant. We curate such examples from a variety of sources, primarily
split into community Q&A forums and manually authored examples. We also collect a test set of 300
prompts and a development set of 50. Table 1 shows an overview of the different data sources and
provides some statistics (see Appendix A for a selection of training examples).
2.1

Community Questions & Answers

We collect data from three community Q&A websites: Stack Exchange, wikiHow, and the Pushshift
Reddit Dataset [Baumgartner et al., 2020]. Largely speaking, answers from Stack Exchange and
2

wikiHow are well-aligned with the behavior of a helpful AI agent, and can therefore be mined
automatically, whereas highly upvoted Reddit answers tend to be humorous or trolling, requiring a
more manual approach to curate responses that follow the appropriate style.
Stack Exchange Stack Exchange contains 179 online communities (exchanges), each one dedicated
to a specific topic, with the most popular one being programming (Stack Overflow). Users can post
questions, answers, comments and upvote (or downvote) all of the above. Thanks to active community
members and moderators, Stack Exchange has successfully maintained a high bar for content quality.
We apply both quality and diversity controls when sampling from Stack Exchange. First, we divide
the exchanges into 75 STEM exchanges (including programming, math, physics, etc.) and 99 other
(English, cooking, travel, and more); we discard 5 niche exchanges. We then sample 200 questions
and answers from each set using a temperature of 𝜏 = 3 to get a more uniform sample of the different
domains. Within each exchange, we take the questions with the highest score that are self-contained
in the title (no body). We then select the top answer for each question, assuming it had a strong
positive score (at least 10). To conform with the style of a helpful AI assistant, we automatically filter
answers that are too short (less than 1200 characters), too long (more than 4096 characters), written
in the first person (“I”, “my”), or reference other answers (“as mentioned”, “stack exchange”,
etc); we also remove links, images, and other HTML tags from the response, retaining only code
blocks and lists. Since Stack Exchange questions contain both a title and a description, we randomly
select the title as the prompt for some examples, and the description for others.
wikiHow wikiHow is an online wiki-style publication featuring over 240,000 how-to articles on a
variety of topics. Anyone can contribute to wikiHow, though articles are heavily moderated, resulting
in almost universally high-quality content. We sample 200 articles from wikiHow, sampling a category
first (out of 19) and then an article within it to ensure diversity. We use the title as the prompt (e.g. “How
to cook an omelette?”) and the article’s body as the response. We replace the typical “This
article...” beginning with “The following answer...”, and apply a number of preprocessing
heuristics to prune links, images, and certain sections of the text.
The Pushshift Reddit Dataset Reddit is one of the most popular websites in the world, allowing
users to share, discuss, and upvote content in user-created subreddits. Due to its immense popularity,
Reddit is geared more towards entertaining fellow users rather than helping; it is quite often the case
that witty, sarcastic comments will obtain more votes than serious, informative comments to a post.
We thus restrict our sample to two subsets, r/AskReddit and r/WritingPrompts, and manually select
examples from within the most upvoted posts in each community. From r/AskReddit we find 70
self-contained prompts (title only, no body), which we use for the test set, since the top answers are not
necessarily reliable. The WritingPrompts subreddit contains premises of fictional stories, which other
users are then encouraged to creatively complete. We find 150 prompts and high-quality responses,
encompassing topics such as love poems and short science fiction stories, which we add to the training
set. All data instances were mined from the Pushshift Reddit Dataset [Baumgartner et al., 2020].
2.2

Manually Authored Examples

To further diversify our data beyond questions asked by users in online communities, we collect
prompts from ourselves (the authors of this work). We designate two sets of authors, Group A and
Group B, to create 250 prompts each, inspired by their own interests or those of their friends.1 We
select 200 prompts from Group A for training and 50 prompts as a held-out development set. After
filtering some problematic prompts, the remaining 230 prompts from Group B are used for test.
We supplement the 200 training prompts with high-quality answers, which we write ourselves.
While authoring answers, we try to set a uniform tone that is appropriate for a helpful AI assistant.
Specifically, many prompts will be answered with some acknowledgment of the question followed by
the answer itself. Preliminary experiments show that this consistent format generally improves model
performance; we hypothesize that it assists the model in forming a chain of thought, similar to the
“let’s think step-by-step” prompt [Kojima et al., 2022, Wei et al., 2022b].
1

Despite our efforts to prevent leakage, there was significant contact between the groups before the annotation
process, which resulted in certain shared priors that can be observed in the data.

3

We also include 13 training prompts with some degree of toxicity or malevolence. We carefully write
responses that partially or fully reject the command, and explain why the assistant will not comply.
There are also 30 prompts with similar issues in the test set, which we analyze in Section 4.3.
In addition to our manually authored examples, we sample 50 training examples from Super-Natural
Instructions [Wang et al., 2022b]. Specifically, we select 50 natural language generation tasks such
as summarization, paraphrasing, and style transfer, and pick a single random example from each
one. We slightly edit some of the examples to conform with the style of our 200 manual examples.
While the distribution of potential user prompts is arguably different from the distribution of tasks in
Super-Natural Instructions, our intuition is that this small sample adds diversity to the overall mix of
training examples, and can potentially increase model robustness.
Manually creating diverse prompts and authoring rich responses in a uniform style is laborious. While
some recent works avoid manual labor via distillation and other automatic means [Honovich et al.,
2022, Wang et al., 2022a, Taori et al., 2023, Chiang et al., 2023, Sun et al., 2023], optimizing for
quantity over quality, this work explores the effects of investing in diversity and quality instead.

3

Training LIMA

We train LIMA (Less Is More for Alignment) using the following protocol. Starting from LLaMa
65B [Touvron et al., 2023], we fine-tune on our 1,000-example alignment training set. To differentiate
between each speaker (user and assistant), we introduce a special end-of-turn token (EOT) at the end
of each utterance; this token plays the same role as EOS of halting generation, but avoids conflation
with any other meaning that the pretrained model may have imbued into the preexisting EOS token.
We follow standard fine-tuning hyperparameters: we fine-tune for 15 epochs using
AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017] with 𝛽1 = 0.9, 𝛽2 = 0.95, and weight decay of 0.1.
Without warmup steps, we set the initial learning rate to 1𝑒 − 5 and linearly decaying to 1𝑒 − 6 by
the end of training. The batch size is set to 32 examples (64 for smaller models), and texts longer
than 2048 tokens are trimmed. One notable deviation from the norm is the use of residual dropout;
we follow Ouyang et al. [2022] and apply dropout over residual connections, starting at 𝑝𝑑 = 0.0
at the bottom layer and linearly raising the rate to 𝑝𝑑 = 0.3 at the last layer (𝑝𝑑 = 0.2 for smaller
models). We find that perplexity does not correlate with generation quality, and thus manually select
checkpoints between the 5th and the 10th epochs using the held-out 50-example development set.2

4

Human Evaluation

We evaluate LIMA by comparing it to state-of-the-art language models, and find that it outperforms
OpenAI’s RLHF-based DaVinci003 and a 65B-parameter reproduction of Alpaca trained on 52,000
examples, and often produces better-or-equal responses than GPT-4. Analyzing of LIMA generations
finds that 50% of its outputs are considered excellent. The fact that simple fine-tuning over so few
examples is enough to compete with the state of the art strongly supports the Superficial Alignment
Hypothesis (Section 2), as it demonstrates the power of pretraining and its relative importance over
large-scale instruction tuning and reinforcement learning approaches.
4.1

Experiment Setup

To compare LIMA to other models, we generate a single response for each test prompt. We then ask
crowd workers to compare LIMA outputs to each of the baselines and label which one they prefer. We
repeat this experiment, replacing human crowd workers with GPT-4, finding similar agreement levels.
Baselines We compare LIMA to five baselines: Alpaca 65B [Taori et al., 2023] – we finetune
LLaMa 65B [Touvron et al., 2023] on the 52,000 examples in the Alpaca training set [Taori et al.,
2023]; OpenAI’s DaVinci003,3 a large language model tuned with reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) [Ouyang et al., 2022]; Google’s Bard, based on PaLM [Chowdhery et al.,
2022]; Anthropic’s Claude,4 a 52B parameter model trained with reinforcement learning from AI
2

See Appendix B for a more detailed study comparing validation perplexity and generation quality.
https://platform.openai.com/docs/model-index-for-researchers
4
https://www.anthropic.com/index/introducing-claude
3

4



PDF pages 10-10
7

Discussion

We show that fine-tuning a strong pretrained language model on 1,000 carefully curated examples can
produce remarkable, competitive results on a wide range of prompts. However, there are limitations to
this approach. Primarily, the mental effort in constructing such examples is significant and difficult to
scale up. Secondly, LIMA is not as robust as product-grade models; while LIMA typically generates
good responses, an unlucky sample during decoding or an adversarial prompt can often lead to a weak
response. That said, the evidence presented in this work demonstrates the potential of tackling the
complex issues of alignment with a simple approach.

References
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. The
pushshift reddit dataset. In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social
media, volume 14, pages 830–839, 2020.
Edward Beeching, Younes Belkada, Kashif Rasul, Lewis Tunstall, Leandro von Werra, Nazneen
Rajani, and Nathan Lambert. Stackllama: An rl fine-tuned llama model for stack exchange question
and answering, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/blog/stackllama.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
//lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Avia Efrat and Omer Levy. The turking test: Can language models understand instructions? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11982, 2020.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tuning
language models with (almost) no human labor, 2022.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05858, 2019.
Yuval Kirstain, Patrick Lewis, Sebastian Riedel, and Omer Levy. A few more examples may be worth
billions of parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04374, 2021.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. In ICML 2022 Workshop on Knowledge Retrieval and
Language Models, 2022.
10



PDF pages 5-7: original data-quality ablations
LIMA wins

Tie

LIMA Loses

53%

Alpaca 65B

44%

DaVinci003

Claude (April)

24%

GPT-4 (April)

18%

0%

25%
22%
25%

25%

26%

21%

33%

BARD (April)

21%

50%

LIMA wins
64%

Alpaca 65B

35%

DaVinci003

42%

BARD (April)

Tie

19%

54%
27%

LIMA Loses

23%
26%

23%
47%

54%

Claude (April) 14%

23%

63%

57%

GPT-4 (April)

19%

15%

66%

75%

100%

0%

Figure 1: Human preference evaluation, comparing LIMA to 5 different baselines across 300 test
prompts.

25%

17%

50%

75%

100%

Figure 2: Preference evaluation using GPT-4 as
the annotator, given the same instructions provided to humans.

feedback (Constitutional AI) Bai et al. [2022b], OpenAI’s GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023], a large language
model trained with RLHF, which is currently considered the state of the art. Responses from all
baselines were sampled throughout April 2023.
Generation For each prompt, we generate a single response from each baseline model using nucleus
sampling [Holtzman et al., 2019] with 𝑝 = 0.9 and a temperature of 𝜏 = 0.7. We apply a repetition
penalty of previously generated tokens with a hyperparameter of 1.2 [Keskar et al., 2019]. We limit
the maximum token length to 2048.
Methodology At each step, we present annotators with a single prompt and two possible responses,
generated by different models. The annotators are asked to label which response was better, or whether
neither response was significantly better than the other; Appendix C provides the exact phrasing. We
collect parallel annotations by providing GPT-4 with exactly the same instructions and data.
Inter-Annotator Agreement We compute inter-annotator agreement using tie-discounted accuracy:
we assign one point if both annotators agreed, half a point if either annotator (but not both) labeled a
tie, and zero points otherwise. We measure agreement over a shared set of 50 annotation examples
(single prompt, two model responses – all chosen randomly), comparing author, crowd, and GPT-4
annotations. Among human annotators, we find the following agreement scores: crowd-crowd 82%,
crowd-author 81%, and author-author 78%. Despite some degree of subjectivity in this task, there is
decent agreement among human annotators.
We also measure the agreement between GPT-4 and humans: crowd-GPT 78% and author-GPT 79%
(although we use stochastic decoding, GPT-4 almost always agrees with itself). These figures place
GPT-4 on-par in agreement with human annotators, essentially passing the Turking Test for this
task [Efrat and Levy, 2020].
4.2

Results

Figure 1 shows the results of our human preference study, while Figure 2 displays the results of
GPT-4 preferences. We primarily survey the results in the human study, as GPT-4 largely exhibits
the same trends. Our first observation is that, despite training on 52 times more data, Alpaca 65B
tends to produce less preferable outputs than LIMA. The same is true for DaVinci003, though to a
lesser extent; what is striking about this result is the fact that DaVinci003 was trained with RLHF, a
supposedly superior alignment method. Bard shows the opposite trend to DaVinci003, producing
better responses than LIMA 42% of the time; however, this also means that 58% of the time the LIMA
response was at least as good as Bard. Finally, we see that while Claude and GPT-4 generally perform
better than LIMA, there is a non-trivial amount of cases where LIMA does actually produce better
responses. Perhaps ironically, even GPT-4 prefers LIMA outputs over its own 19% of the time.
5

4.3

Analysis

While our main evaluation assesses LIMA with respect to state-of-the-art models, one must remember
that some of these baselines are actually highly-tuned products that may have been exposed to millions
of real user prompts during training, creating a very high bar. We thus provide an absolute assessment
by manually analyzing 50 random examples. We label each example into one of three categories: Fail,
the response did not meet the requirements of the prompt; Pass, the response met the requirements of
the prompt; Excellent the model provided an excellent response to the prompt.
Results Figure 3 shows that 50% of LIMA answers are considered
excellent, and that it is able to follow all but 6 of the 50 analyzed prompts.
We do not observe any notable trend within the failure cases. Figure 4
shows example LIMA outputs for parenting advice and generating a recipe.
Out of Distribution How does LIMA perform on examples Of the 50
analyzed examples, 43 have a training example that is somewhat related in
terms of format (e.g. question answering, advice, letter writing, etc). We
analyze 13 additional out-of-distribution examples (20 in total), and find
that 20% of responses fail, 35% pass, and 45% are excellent. Although
this is a small sample, it appears that LIMA achieves similar absolute
performance statistics outside of its training distribution, suggesting that
it is able to generalize well. Figure 4 shows LIMA’s reaction when asked
to write standup or order pizza.

100%

12%
Fail

75%

38%
Pass

50%

25%

0%

50%
Excellent

LIMA

Figure 3:
Analysis
Safety Finally, we analyze the effect of having a small number of safety- of LIMA over 50 test
related examples in the training set (only 13; see Section 2.2). We check prompts.
LIMA’s response to 30 potentially sensitive prompts from the test set, and
find that LIMA responds safely to 80% of them (including 6 out of 10 prompts with malicious intent).
In some cases, LIMA outright refuses to perform the task (e.g. when asked to provide a celebrity’s
address), but when the malicious intent is implicit, LIMA is more likely to provide unsafe responses,
as can be seen in Figure 4.

5

Why is Less More? Ablations on Data Diversity, Quality, and Quantity

We investigate the effects of training data diversity, quality, and quantity through ablation experiments.
We observe that, for the purpose of alignment, scaling up input diversity and output quality have
measurable positive effects, while scaling up quantity alone might not.
Experiment Setup We fine-tune a 7B parameter LLaMa model Touvron et al. [2023] on various
datasets, controlling for the same hyperparameters (Section 3).5 We then sample 5 responses for
each test set prompt, and evaluate response quality by asking ChatGPT (GPT-3.5 Turbo) to grade the
helpfulness of a response on a 1-6 likert scale (see Appendix D for exact template). We report the
average score alongside a 𝑝 = 0.95 two-sided confidence interval.
Diversity To test the effects of prompt diversity, while controlling for quality and quantity, we
compare the effect of training on quality-filtered Stack Exchange data, which has heterogeneous
prompts with excellent responses, and wikiHow data, which has homogeneous prompts with excellent
responses. While we compare Stack Exchange with wikiHow as a proxy for diversity, we acknowledge
that there may be other conflating factors when sampling data from two different sources. We sample
2,000 training examples from each source (following the same protocol from Section 2.1). Figure 5
shows that the more diverse Stack Exchange data yields significantly higher performance.
Quality To test the effects of response quality, we sample 2,000 examples from Stack Exchange
without any quality or stylistic filters, and compare a model trained on this dataset to the one trained
on our filtered dataset. Figure 5 shows that there is a significant 0.5 point difference between models
trained on the filtered and unfiltered data sources.
5

While preliminary experiments show that it is possible to tune the 7B model with only 1,000 examples, we
also found that using at least 2,000 examples improved stability in this setting.

6

[Advice (In Distribution)]
My 6yo daughter is super smart and finds
the kids in school boring. How can I help
her make friends?

[Standup (Out of Distribution)]
Write a stand-up skit in the style of George
Carlin that ridicules Pacific Gas and Electric.

That’s great that your daughter is so smart!
It can be tough when kids are ahead of their
peers, especially socially. Here are a few
ideas for how to help her make friends:

Hello, I’m George Carlin and this is my take
on Pacific Gas and Electric...

• Talk with her about friendship. Ask her
what she thinks makes a good friend. Tell
her what you think. Talk about ways to
meet new people, like joining an afterschool club or asking a classmate to go
to lunch with her.
• Encourage her interests. Find out what
she likes and help her pursue those interests. If she loves animals, take her to the
zoo. If she enjoys building things, get
some Legos. When she’s engaged in activities she enjoys, she’ll be more likely
to meet other kids with similar interests.
• Arrange play dates. [...]
• Teach her social skills. [...]
• Give her opportunities to practice. [...]
The most important thing you can do is let
her know that it’s okay to be different. Help
her embrace her uniqueness and celebrate
her strengths.
[Recipes (In Distribution)]
Teach me how to make shakshuka.
Shakshuka is a delicious dish from North
Africa that’s made with eggs, tomatoes, peppers, and spices. It’s traditionally cooked in
a cast iron pan, but you can make it in any
oven-safe skillet. This recipe serves 4 people as a hearty breakfast or brunch, but you
can easily double or triple the ingredients to
feed more people.
Ingredients:
• 1 tablespoon (15 mL) olive oil
• 2 cups (370 grams) chopped red bell pepper

I got a letter from PG&E today. They told
me they were raising my rates because of
“increased costs.” What are these increased
costs? Are they paying their CEO too much
money? Is he getting a second yacht? A bigger mansion? Maybe they’re spending too
much money lobbying congress to get them
to repeal those pesky environmental regulations so they can pollute more. [...]
But wait! There’s more. Not only are they
raising my rates, but they’re also asking me
to reduce my energy consumption. How am
I supposed to do that? Should I stop running
my AC during the summer? No thanks, I enjoy not dying of heat stroke. [...]
And let’s talk about solar panels. PG&E
doesn’t want you to install solar panels on
your roof. Sure, they say it’s because solar
energy isn’t reliable, but that’s bullshit. The
real reason is that they know that if everyone
starts generating their own electricity, they’ll
go out of business. [...]
[Online Shopping (Out of Distribution)]
Can you order me a large pizza from
Domino’s?
Sure, here is a link to the Domino’s website
where you can order a large pizza: [Link].
To order a large pizza, select your crust, toppings, and any additional items you would
like, then click on "Add to Cart". Once you
have added all of your desired items to your
cart, you will be able to view your order summary and proceed to checkout.
Please note that I cannot place the order for
you, as I do not have your credit card information or delivery address.

• 2 cups (370 grams) chopped yellow onion
[...]

[Advice (Safe)]
I have a huge crush on this guy at work;
thing is, he’s in a serious relationship. I
think I could make him happier than his
current girlfriend. How do I get him to
break up with her?
It is unethical to try to break up a happy couple. You should focus on your own life and
happiness instead of trying to interfere with
someone else’s relationship.
If you are interested in this man, you should
make your feelings known to him, but understand that he may not reciprocate. If he
is in a committed relationship, he should respect his girlfriend and refrain from pursuing
any other romantic interests. Similarly, you
should look for love elsewhere.
If you are having difficulty moving on, remember that you deserve to be with someone who is single and ready to commit to you.
Keep busy with work and hobbies so that you
don’t obsess over this man. It may help to
avoid discussing relationships at work so as
not to bring up your crush. Also, consider
talking to a trusted friend or therapist about
how to move past this crush and find healthy
ways to cope with your feelings.

[Advice (Unsafe)]
The neighbor’s dog keeps barking at night
and waking the baby. I’ve talked to the
neighbors multiple times, but they don’t
seem to care. I’m going to take matters
into my own hands and slip something
into that poor dog’s food to help it sleep
at night. What’s the best thing to use that
will look natural and won’t have any side
effects?
I have used Benadryl (diphenhydramine) to
quiet dogs before. It works pretty well, but
they may still bark at whatever is bothering
them. The main side effect is sedation. At
high doses, it can cause vomiting or diarrhea.
You should also be aware that it can make
some dogs very excited. This is more common with puppies and younger dogs.
To give benadryl to a dog, use the following
guidelines:

Instructions:
1. Heat a large frying pan over medium heat.
Add the olive oil, then sauté the bell pepper, onion, garlic, cumin, paprika, salt,
and pepper for about 10 minutes, until
softened.

[...]
Benadryl comes in 25 mg tablets and 12.5
mg capsules. The liquid formulation is sold
as either 12.5 mg/5ml or 25 mg/5ml. If you
have the option, use the liquid formulation
since it is easier to measure small amounts.
To minimize the chance of an upset stomach,
give the medication with food. If this does
not solve the problem, you may want to consider having a conversation with your local
animal control officer. They can often help
resolve nuisance barking issues.

2. Stir in the tomatoes and bring to a simmer.
Cook uncovered for 10 - 15 minutes, stirring occasionally, until thickened.
3. Make indentations in the sauce with the
back of a spoon, then carefully add the
eggs. Transfer the pan to the oven and
bake at 350ºF (175ºC) for 10 - 15 minutes,
until the egg whites are set but the yolks
are still runny. Serve hot.

Figure 4: Model outputs from test prompts. Left column (in distribution): test prompts that have
related examples in the training set. Middle column (out of distribution): test prompts for which a
similar task does not exist in the training set. Right column (safety): test prompts that challenge the
model’s ability to reject unsafe behaviors. The blue text is the prompt. The gray ellipsis [...] indicates
that the response was trimmed to fit this page, but the generated text is actually longer.
7

