URL: https://docs.python.org/3.13/tutorial/interpreter.html
Python documentation: 3.13 branch
Accessed: 2026-10-04
Full fetched HTML SHA256: 4381345f4348c90f3dea71990bffca582ab229c32284f73fa03c52966a2eb050
Extraction: defining API/class excerpts or interpreter introductory section; HTML tags stripped.

Using the Python Interpreter
2. Using the Python Interpreter ¶ 

 2.1. Invoking the Interpreter ¶ 
 The Python interpreter is usually installed as /usr/local/bin/python3.13 
on those machines where it is available; putting /usr/local/bin in your
Unix shell’s search path makes it possible to start it by typing the command: 
 python3.13

 to the shell. [ 1 ] Since the choice of the directory where the interpreter lives
is an installation option, other places are possible; check with your local
Python guru or system administrator. (E.g., /usr/local/python is a
popular alternative location.) 
 On Windows machines where you have installed Python from the Microsoft Store , the python3.13 command will be available. If you have
the py.exe launcher installed, you can use the py 
command. See Excursus: Setting environment variables for other ways to launch Python. 
 Typing an end-of-file character ( Control - D on Unix, Control - Z on
Windows) at the primary prompt causes the interpreter to exit with a zero exit
status. If that doesn’t work, you can exit the interpreter by typing the
following command: quit() . 
 The interpreter’s line-editing features include interactive editing, history
substitution and code completion on most systems.
Perhaps the quickest check to see whether command line editing is supported is
typing a word in on the Python prompt, then pressing Left arrow (or Control - b ).
If the cursor moves, you have command line editing; see Appendix
 Interactive Input Editing and History Substitution for an introduction to the keys.
If nothing appears to happen, or if a sequence like ^[[D or ^B appears,
command line editing isn’t available; you’ll only be able to use
backspace to remove characters from the current line. 
 The interpreter operates somewhat like the Unix shell: when called with standard
input connected to a tty device, it reads and executes commands interactively;
when called with a file name argument or with a file as standard input, it reads
and executes a script from that file. 
 A second way of starting the interpreter is python -c command [arg] ... ,
which executes the statement(s) in command , analogous to the shell’s
 -c option. Since Python statements often contain spaces or other
characters that are special to the shell, it is usually advised to quote
 command in its entirety. 
 Some Python modules are also useful as scripts. These can be invoked using
 python -m module [arg] ... , which executes the source file for module as
if you had spelled out its full name on the command line. 
 When a script file is used, it is sometimes useful to be able to run the script
and enter interactive mode afterwards. This can be done by passing -i 
before the script. 
 All command line options are described in Command line and environment .
