Original source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.04088v1
Original PDF SHA256: f8bbf0e9d979b7a8ce7be65119266545a229a85b57e077d8bd048e458bb642da
PDF text extraction independently succeeded with pdftotext. Verbatim excerpt from supplied original-text extraction; ranges below use its 1-based lines.

Original text lines 36-128:
                                        licensed under Apache 2.0. Mixtral outperforms Llama 2 70B and GPT-3.5 on most benchmarks. As
                                        it only uses a subset of its parameters for every token, Mixtral allows faster inference speed at low
                                        batch-sizes, and higher throughput at large batch-sizes.
                                        Mixtral is a sparse mixture-of-experts network. It is a decoder-only model where the feedforward
                                        block picks from a set of 8 distinct groups of parameters. At every layer, for every token, a router
                                        network chooses two of these groups (the “experts”) to process the token and combine their output
                                        additively. This technique increases the number of parameters of a model while controlling cost and
                                        latency, as the model only uses a fraction of the total set of parameters per token.
                                        Mixtral is pretrained with multilingual data using a context size of 32k tokens. It either matches
                                        or exceeds the performance of Llama 2 70B and GPT-3.5, over several benchmarks. In particular,

Figure 1: Mixture of Experts Layer. Each input vector is assigned to 2 of the 8 experts by a router. The
layer’s output is the weighted sum of the outputs of the two selected experts. In Mixtral, an expert is a standard
feedforward block as in a vanilla transformer architecture.
Mixtral demonstrates superior capabilities in mathematics, code generation, and tasks that require
multilingual understanding, significantly outperforming Llama 2 70B in these domains. Experiments
show that Mixtral is able to successfully retrieve information from its context window of 32k tokens,
regardless of the sequence length and the location of the information in the sequence.
We also present Mixtral 8x7B – Instruct, a chat model fine-tuned to follow instructions using
supervised fine-tuning and Direct Preference Optimization [25]. Its performance notably surpasses
that of GPT-3.5 Turbo, Claude-2.1, Gemini Pro, and Llama 2 70B – chat model on human evaluation
benchmarks. Mixtral – Instruct also demonstrates reduced biases, and a more balanced sentiment
profile in benchmarks such as BBQ, and BOLD.
We release both Mixtral 8x7B and Mixtral 8x7B – Instruct under the Apache 2.0 license1 , free for
academic and commercial usage, ensuring broad accessibility and potential for diverse applications.
To enable the community to run Mixtral with a fully open-source stack, we submitted changes to
the vLLM project, which integrates Megablocks CUDA kernels for efficient inference. Skypilot also
allows the deployment of vLLM endpoints on any instance in the cloud.

2         Architectural details
Mixtral is based on a transformer architecture [31] and uses the same
                                                                                    Parameter            Value
modifications as described in [18], with the notable exceptions that Mix-
tral supports a fully dense context length of 32k tokens, and the feed-             dim                   4096
forward blocks are replaced by Mixture-of-Expert layers (Section 2.1).              n_layers                32
The model architecture parameters are summarized in Table 1.                        head_dim               128
                                                                                    hidden_dim           14336
                                                                                    n_heads                 32
2.1        Sparse Mixture of Experts                                                n_kv_heads               8
We present a brief overview of the Mixture of Experts layer (Figure 1).             context_len          32768
For a more in-depth overview, see [12]. The output of the MoE module                vocab_size           32000
for a given input x is determined by the weighted sum of the outputs                num_experts              8
of the expert networks, where the weights are given by the gating                   top_k_experts            2
network’s output. i.e. given n expert networks {E0 , Ei , ..., En−1 }, the Table 1: Model architecture.
output of the expert layer is given by:
                                         n−1
                                          X
                                             G(x)i · Ei (x).
                                              i=0

Here, G(x)i denotes the n-dimensional output of the gating network for the i-th expert, and Ei (x)
is the output of the i-th expert network. If the gating vector is sparse, we can avoid computing
the outputs of experts whose gates are zero. There are multiple alternative ways of implementing
G(x) [6, 15, 35], but a simple and performant one is implemented by taking the softmax over the
Top-K logits of a linear layer [28]. We use
                                 G(x) := Softmax(TopK(x · Wg )),
where (TopK(ℓ))i := ℓi if ℓi is among the top-K coordinates of logits ℓ ∈ Rn and (TopK(ℓ))i := −∞
otherwise. The value of K – the number of experts used per token – is a hyper-parameter that modu-
lates the amount of compute used to process each token. If one increases n while keeping K fixed, one
      1
          https://mistral.ai/news/mixtral-of-experts/


                                                        2

can increase the model’s parameter count while keeping its computational cost effectively constant.
This motivates a distinction between the model’s total parameter count (commonly referenced as the
sparse parameter count), which grows with n, and the number of parameters used for processing an
individual token (called the active parameter count), which grows with K up to n.
MoE layers can be run efficiently on single GPUs with high performance specialized kernels. For
example, Megablocks [13] casts the feed-forward network (FFN) operations of the MoE layer as large
sparse matrix multiplications, significantly enhancing the execution speed and naturally handling
cases where different experts get a variable number of tokens assigned to them. Moreover, the
MoE layer can be distributed to multiple GPUs through standard Model Parallelism techniques, and
through a particular kind of partitioning strategy called Expert Parallelism (EP) [28]. During the MoE
layer’s execution, tokens meant to be processed by a specific expert are routed to the corresponding
GPU for processing, and the expert’s output is returned to the original token location. Note that EP
introduces challenges in load balancing, as it is essential to distribute the workload evenly across the
GPUs to prevent overloading individual GPUs or hitting computational bottlenecks.
In a Transformer model, the MoE layer is applied independently per token and replaces the
feed-forward (FFN) sub-block of the transformer block. For Mixtral we use the same SwiGLU
architecture as the expert function Ei (x) and set K = 2. This means each token is routed to two
SwiGLU sub-blocks with different sets of weights. Taking this all together, the output y for an input
token x is computed as:
                                 n−1
                                 X
                           y=          Softmax(Top2(x · Wg ))i · SwiGLUi (x).
                                 i=0

This formulation is similar to the GShard architecture [21], with the exceptions that we replace all
FFN sub-blocks by MoE layers while GShard replaces every other block, and that GShard uses a
more elaborate gating strategy for the second expert assigned to each token.

