Original source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.18290v3
Original PDF SHA256: 92cb3a2b71362acda98a789b03d88688fd33cf5fcf13f81d2b1de30ee7d3b67a
PDF text extraction independently succeeded with pdftotext. Verbatim excerpt from supplied original-text extraction; ranges below use its 1-based lines.

Original text lines 118-315:
optimizing it [16, 9, 12, 36, 21]. We instead present a single stage policy learning approach that
directly optimizes a policy to satisfy preferences.
3 Preliminaries
We review the RLHF pipeline in Ziegler et al. (and later [40, 1, 28]). It usually includes three phases:
1) supervised fine-tuning (SFT); 2) preference sampling and reward learning and 3) RL optimization.
SFT: RLHF typically begins by fine-tuning a pre-trained LM with supervised learning on high-quality
data for the downstream task(s) of interest (dialogue, summarization, etc.), to obtain a model πSFT.
Reward Modelling Phase : In the second phase the SFT model is prompted with prompts x to
produce pairs of answers (y1, y2) ∼ πSFT(y | x). These are then presented to human labelers
who express preferences for one answer, denoted as yw ≻ yl | x where yw and yl denotes the
preferred and dispreferred completion amongst (y1, y2) respectively. The preferences are assumed
to be generated by some latent reward model r∗(y, x), which we do not have access to. There are a
number of approaches used to model preferences, the Bradley-Terry (BT) [5] model being a popular
choice (although more general Plackett-Luce ranking models [32, 23] are also compatible with the
framework if we have access to several ranked answers). The BT model stipulates that the human
preference distribution p∗ can be written as:
p∗(y1 ≻ y2 | x) = exp (r∗(x, y1))
exp (r∗(x, y1)) + exp (r∗(x, y2)) . (1)
Assuming access to a static dataset of comparisons D =

x(i), y(i)
w , y(i)
l
	N
i=1 sampled from p∗, we
can parametrize a reward model rϕ(x, y) and estimate the parameters via maximum likelihood.
Framing the problem as a binary classification we have the negative log-likelihood loss:
LR(rϕ, D) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D

log σ(rϕ(x, yw) − rϕ(x, yl))

(2)
where σ is the logistic function. In the context of LMs, the network rϕ(x, y) is often initialized from
the SFT model πSFT(y | x) with the addition of a linear layer on top of the final transformer layer
that produces a single scalar prediction for the reward value [51]. To ensure a reward function with
lower variance, prior works normalize the rewards, such that Ex,y∼D [rϕ(x, y)] = 0 for all x.
RL Fine-Tuning Phase: During the RL phase, the learned reward function is used to provide
feedback to the language model. Following prior works [17, 18], the optimization is formulated as
max
πθ
Ex∼D,y∼πθ(y|x)

rϕ(x, y)

− βDKL

πθ(y | x) || πref(y | x)

, (3)
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
where β is a parameter controlling the deviation from the base reference policy πref, namely the ini-
tial SFT model πSFT. In practice, the language model policy πθ is also initialized to πSFT. The
added constraint is important, as it prevents the model from deviating too far from the distri-
bution on which the reward model is accurate, as well as maintaining the generation diversity
and preventing mode-collapse to single high-reward answers. Due to the discrete nature of lan-
guage generation, this objective is not differentiable and is typically optimized with reinforce-
ment learning. The standard approach [ 51, 40, 1, 28] has been to construct the reward function
r(x, y) = rϕ(x, y) − β(log πθ(y | x) − log πref(y | x)), and maximize using PPO [39].
4 Direct Preference Optimization
Motivated by the challenges of applying reinforcement learning algorithms on large-scale problems
such as fine-tuning language models, our goal is to derive a simple approach for policy optimization
using preferences directly. Unlike prior RLHF methods, which learn a reward and then optimize it
via RL, our approach leverages a particular choice of reward model parameterization that enables
extraction of its optimal policy in closed form, without an RL training loop. As we will describe
next in detail, our key insight is to leverage an analytical mapping from reward functions to optimal
policies, which enables us to transform a loss function over reward functions into a loss function
over policies. This change-of-variables approach avoids fitting an explicit, standalone reward model,
while still optimizing under existing models of human preferences, such as the Bradley-Terry model.
In essence, the policy network represents both the language model and the (implicit) reward.
Deriving the DPO objective. We start with the same RL objective as prior work, Eq. 3, under a
general reward function r. Following prior work [31, 30, 19, 15], it is straightforward to show that
the optimal solution to the KL-constrained reward maximization objective in Eq. 3 takes the form:
πr(y | x) = 1
Z(x) πref(y | x) exp
 1
β r(x, y)

, (4)
where Z(x) = P
y πref(y | x) exp

1
β r(x, y)

is the partition function. See Appendix A.1 for a
complete derivation. Even if we use the MLE estimate rϕ of the ground-truth reward function r∗, it is
still expensive to estimate the partition function Z(x) [19, 15], which makes this representation hard
to utilize in practice. However, we can rearrange Eq. 4 to express the reward function in terms of its
corresponding optimal policy πr, the reference policy πref, and the unknown partition function Z(·).
Specifically, we first take the logarithm of both sides of Eq. 4 and then with some algebra we obtain:
r(x, y) = β log πr(y | x)
πref(y | x) + β log Z(x). (5)
We can apply this reparameterization to the ground-truth reward r∗ and corresponding optimal model
π∗. Fortunately, the Bradley-Terry model depends only on the difference of rewards between two
completions, i.e., p∗(y1 ≻ y2 | x) = σ(r∗(x, y1) − r∗(x, y2)). Substituting the reparameterization
in Eq. 5 for r∗(x, y) into the preference model Eq. 1, the partition function cancels, and we can
express the human preference probability in terms of only the optimal policy π∗ and reference policy
πref. Thus, the optimal RLHF policy π∗ under the Bradley-Terry model satisfies the preference model:
p∗(y1 ≻ y2 | x) = 1
1 + exp

β log π∗(y2|x)
πref(y2|x) − β log π∗(y1|x)
πref(y1|x)
 (6)
The derivation is in Appendix A.2. While Eq. 6 uses the Bradley-Terry model, we can similarly
derive expressions under the more general Plackett-Luce models [32, 23], shown in Appendix A.3.
Now that we have the probability of human preference data in terms of the optimal policy rather than
the reward model, we can formulate a maximum likelihood objective for a parametrized policyπθ.
Analogous to the reward modeling approach (i.e. Eq. 2), our policy objective becomes:
LDPO(πθ; πref) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D

log σ

β log πθ(yw | x)
πref(yw | x) − β log πθ(yl | x)
πref(yl | x)

. (7)
This way, we fit an implicit reward using an alternative parameterization, whose optimal policy is
simply πθ. Moreover, since our procedure is equivalent to fitting a reparametrized Bradley-Terry
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
model, it enjoys certain theoretical properties, such as consistencies under suitable assumption of the
preference data distribution [4]. In Section 5, we further discuss theoretical properties of DPO in
relation to other works.
What does the DPO update do? For a mechanistic understanding of DPO, it is useful to analyze the
gradient of the loss function LDPO. The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:
∇θLDPO(πθ; πref) =
− βE(x,yw,yl)∼D

σ(ˆrθ(x, yl) − ˆrθ(x, yw))| {z }
higher weight when reward estimate is wrong

∇θ log π(yw | x)| {z }
increase likelihood of yw
− ∇ θ log π(yl | x)| {z }
decrease likelihood of yl

,
where ˆrθ(x, y) = β log πθ(y|x)
πref(y|x) is the reward implicitly defined by the language model πθ and refer-
ence model πref (more in Section 5). Intuitively, the gradient of the loss function LDPO increases the
likelihood of the preferred completions yw and decreases the likelihood of dispreferred completions
yl. Importantly, the examples are weighed by how much higher the implicit reward model ˆrθ rates
the dispreferred completions, scaled by β, i.e, how incorrectly the implicit reward model orders
the completions, accounting for the strength of the KL constraint. Our experiments suggest the
importance of this weighting, as a naïve version of this method without the weighting coefficient can
cause the language model to degenerate (Appendix Table 3).
DPO outline. The general DPO pipeline is as follows: 1) Sample completions y1, y2 ∼ πref(· | x)
for every prompt x, label with human preferences to construct the offline dataset of preferences
D = {x(i), y(i)
w , yl)(i)}N
i=1 and 2) optimize the language model πθ to minimize LDPO for the given
πref and D and desired β. In practice, one would like to reuse preference datasets publicly available,
rather than generating samples and gathering human preferences. Since the preference datasets
are sampled using πSFT, we initialize πref = πSFT whenever available. However, when πSFT is
not available, we initialize πref by maximizing likelihood of preferred completions (x, yw), that
is, πref = arg maxπ Ex,yw∼D [log π(yw | x)]. This procedure helps mitigate the distribution shift
between the true reference distribution which is unavailable, and πref used by DPO. Further details
related to the implementation and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix B.
5 Theoretical Analysis of DPO
In this section, we give further interpretation of the DPO method, provide theoretical backing, and
relate advantages of DPO to issues with actor critic algorithms used for RLHF (such as PPO [39]).
5.1 Your Language Model Is Secretly a Reward Model
DPO is able to bypass both fitting an explicit reward and performing RL to learn the policy using
a single maximum likelihood objective. Note the optimization objective Eq. 5 is equivalent to a
Bradley-Terry model with a reward parameterization r∗(x, y) = β log π∗
θ (y|x)
πref(y|x) and we optimize our
parametric model πθ, equivalently to the reward model optimization in Eq. 2 under the change of
variables. In this section we will build the theory behind this reparameterization, show that it does
not constrain the class of learned reward models, and allows for the exact recovery of the optimal
policy. We begin with by defining an equivalence relation between reward functions.
Definition 1. We say that two reward functions r(x, y) and r′(x, y) are equivalent iff
r(x, y) − r′(x, y) = f (x) for some function f.
It is easy to see that this is indeed an equivalence relation, which partitions the set of reward functions
into classes. We can state the following two lemmas:
Lemma 1. Under the Plackett-Luce, and in particular the Bradley-Terry, preference framework, two
reward functions from the same class induce the same preference distribution.
Lemma 2. Two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same optimal policy
under the constrained RL problem.
The proofs are straightforward and we defer them to Appendix A.5. The first lemma is a well-known
under-specification issue with the Plackett-Luce family of models [32]. Due to this under-specification,
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
we usually have to impose additional identifiability constraints to achieve any guarantees on the MLE
estimates from Eq. 2 [ 4]. The second lemma states that all reward functions from the same class
yield the same optimal policy, hence for our final objective, we are only interested in recovering an
arbitrary reward function from the optimal class. We prove the following Theorem in Appendix A.6:
Theorem 1. Under mild assumptions, all reward classes consistent with the Plackett-Luce
(and Bradley-Terry in particular) models can be represented with the reparameterization
r(x, y) = β log π(y|x)
πref(y|x) for some model π(y | x) and a given reference model πref(y | x).

Original text lines 640-664:
7 Discussion
Learning from preferences is a powerful, scalable framework for training capable, aligned language
models. We have introduced DPO, a simple training paradigm for training language models from
preferences without reinforcement learning. Rather than coercing the preference learning problem
into a standard RL setting in order to use off-the-shelf RL algorithms, DPO identifies a mapping
between language model policies and reward functions that enables training a language model to
satisfy human preferences directly, with a simple cross-entropy loss, without reinforcement learning
or loss of generality. With virtually no tuning of hyperparameters, DPO performs similarly or better
than existing RLHF algorithms, including those based on PPO; DPO thus meaningfully reduces the
barrier to training more language models from human preferences.
Limitations & Future Work. Our results raise several important questions for future work. How
does the DPO policy generalize out of distribution, compared with learning from an explicit reward
function? Our initial results suggest that DPO policies can generalize similarly to PPO-based models,
but more comprehensive study is needed. For example, can training with self-labeling from the
DPO policy similarly make effective use of unlabeled prompts? On another front, how does reward
over-optimization manifest in the direct preference optimization setting, and is the slight decrease
in performance in Figure 3-right an instance of it? Additionally, while we evaluate models up to
6B parameters, exploration of scaling DPO to state-of-the-art models orders of magnitude larger is
an exciting direction for future work. Regarding evaluations, we find that the win rates computed
by GPT-4 are impacted by the prompt; future work may study the best way to elicit high-quality
judgments from automated systems. Finally, many possible applications of DPO exist beyond training
language models from human preferences, including training generative models in other modalities.
Acknowledgements
EM gratefully acknowledges funding from a Knight-Hennessy Graduate Fellowship. CF and CM
are CIFAR Fellows. This work was supported in part by the Stanford Accelerator for Learning
