ORIGINAL PDF: outputs/posttrain-design/ppo-reference/instructgpt-original.pdf
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.02155v1
VERSION: arXiv:2203.02155v1
PDF SHA256: c1984bb50a5b90fddb895fdc3a0f72e5bc977148c9f63ef6040cbe7a3e1f0d98
EXTRACTION: pdftotext version 25.03.0, actual PDF pages [1, 6, 8, 19]


--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 1 ---
Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback

arXiv:2203.02155v1 [cs.CL] 4 Mar 2022

Long Ouyang∗

Jeff Wu∗

Xu Jiang∗

Diogo Almeida∗

Pamela Mishkin∗

Chong Zhang

Sandhini Agarwal

John Schulman

Jacob Hilton

Fraser Kelton

Amanda Askell†

Peter Welinder

Jan Leike∗

Carroll L. Wainwright∗

Katarina Slama

Luke Miller

Alex Ray

Maddie Simens

Paul Christiano∗†
Ryan Lowe∗

OpenAI

Abstract
Making language models bigger does not inherently make them better at following
a user’s intent. For example, large language models can generate outputs that
are untruthful, toxic, or simply not helpful to the user. In other words, these
models are not aligned with their users. In this paper, we show an avenue for
aligning language models with user intent on a wide range of tasks by fine-tuning
with human feedback. Starting with a set of labeler-written prompts and prompts
submitted through the OpenAI API, we collect a dataset of labeler demonstrations
of the desired model behavior, which we use to fine-tune GPT-3 using supervised
learning. We then collect a dataset of rankings of model outputs, which we use to
further fine-tune this supervised model using reinforcement learning from human
feedback. We call the resulting models InstructGPT. In human evaluations on
our prompt distribution, outputs from the 1.3B parameter InstructGPT model are
preferred to outputs from the 175B GPT-3, despite having 100x fewer parameters.
Moreover, InstructGPT models show improvements in truthfulness and reductions
in toxic output generation while having minimal performance regressions on public
NLP datasets. Even though InstructGPT still makes simple mistakes, our results
show that fine-tuning with human feedback is a promising direction for aligning
language models with human intent.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LMs) can be “prompted” to perform a range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, given some examples of the task as input. However, these models often express
unintended behaviors such as making up facts, generating biased or toxic text, or simply not following
user instructions (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al., 2021; Kenton et al., 2021; Weidinger et al.,
2021; Tamkin et al., 2021; Gehman et al., 2020). This is because the language modeling objective
∗

Primary authors. This was a joint project of the OpenAI Alignment team. RL and JL are the team leads.
Corresponding author: lowe@openai.com.
†
Work done while at OpenAI. Current affiliations: AA: Anthropic; PC: Alignment Research Center.



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 6 ---
Table 1: Distribution of use
case categories from our API
prompt dataset.
Use-case
Generation
Open QA
Brainstorming
Chat
Rewrite
Summarization
Classification
Other
Closed QA
Extract

(%)
45.6%
12.4%
11.2%
8.4%
6.6%
4.2%
3.5%
3.5%
2.6%
1.9%

Table 2: Illustrative prompts from our API prompt dataset. These
are fictional examples inspired by real usage—see more examples
in Appendix A.2.1.
Use-case

Prompt

Brainstorming

List five ideas for how to regain enthusiasm for my
career

Generation

Write a short story where a bear goes to the beach,
makes friends with a seal, and then returns home.

Rewrite

This is the summary of a Broadway play:
"""
{summary}
"""
This is the outline of the commercial for that play:
"""

3

Methods and experimental details

3.1

High-level methodology

Our methodology follows that of Ziegler et al. (2019) and Stiennon et al. (2020), who applied
it in the stylistic continuation and summarization domains. We start with a pretrained language
model (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al.,
2022), a distribution of prompts on which we want our model to produce aligned outputs, and a team
of trained human labelers (see Sections 3.4 for details). We then apply the following three steps
(Figure 2).
Step 1: Collect demonstration data, and train a supervised policy. Our labelers provide demonstrations of the desired behavior on the input prompt distribution (see Section 3.2 for details on this
distribution). We then fine-tune a pretrained GPT-3 model on this data using supervised learning.
Step 2: Collect comparison data, and train a reward model. We collect a dataset of comparisons
between model outputs, where labelers indicate which output they prefer for a given input. We then
train a reward model to predict the human-preferred output.
Step 3: Optimize a policy against the reward model using PPO. We use the output of the
RM as a scalar reward. We fine-tune the supervised policy to optimize this reward using the PPO
algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017).
Steps 2 and 3 can be iterated continuously; more comparison data is collected on the current best
policy, which is used to train a new RM and then a new policy. In practice, most of our comparison
data comes from our supervised policies, with some coming from our PPO policies.
3.2

Dataset

Our prompt dataset consists primarily of text prompts submitted to the OpenAI API, specifically
those using an earlier version of the InstructGPT models (trained via supervised learning on a subset
of our demonstration data) on the Playground interface.4 Customers using the Playground were
informed that their data could be used to train further models via a recurring notification any time
InstructGPT models were used. In this paper we do not use data from customers using the API in
production. We heuristically deduplicate prompts by checking for prompts that share a long common
prefix, and we limit the number of prompts to 200 per user ID. We also create our train, validation,
and test splits based on user ID, so that the validation and test sets contain no data from users whose
data is in the training set. To avoid the models learning potentially sensitive customer details, we
filter all prompts in the training split for personally identifiable information (PII).
4

This is an interface hosted by OpenAI to interact directly with models on our API; see https://beta.
openai.com/playground.

6



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 8 ---
doing so requires making some difficult design decisions that we leave to future work; see Section 5.4
for more discussion). However, in our final evaluations we asked labelers prioritize truthfulness and
harmlessness (since this is what we really care about).
As in Stiennon et al. (2020), we collaborate closely with labelers over the course of the project. We
have an onboarding process to train labelers on the project, write detailed instructions for each task
(see Appendix B.2), and answer labeler questions in a shared chat room.
As an initial study to see how well our model generalizes to the preferences of other labelers, we hire
a separate set of labelers who do not produce any of the training data. These labelers are sourced
from the same vendors, but do not undergo a screening test.
Despite the complexity of the task, we find that inter-annotator agreement rates are quite high:
training labelers agree with each-other 72.6 ± 1.5% of the time, while for held-out labelers this
number is 77.3 ± 1.3%. For comparison, in the summarization work of Stiennon et al. (2020)
researcher-researcher agreement was 73 ± 4%.
3.5

Models

We start with the GPT-3 pretrained language models from Brown et al. (2020). These models are
trained on a broad distribution of Internet data and are adaptable to a wide range of downstream tasks,
but have poorly characterized behavior. Starting from these models, we then train models with three
different techniques:
Supervised fine-tuning (SFT). We fine-tune GPT-3 on our labeler demonstrations using supervised
learning. We trained for 16 epochs, using a cosine learning rate decay, and residual dropout of 0.2.
We do our final SFT model selection based on the RM score on the validation set. Similarly to Wu
et al. (2021), we find that our SFT models overfit on validation loss after 1 epoch; however, we find
that training for more epochs helps both the RM score and human preference ratings, despite this
overfitting.
Reward modeling (RM). Starting from the SFT model with the final unembedding layer removed,
we trained a model to take in a prompt and response, and output a scalar reward. In this paper we
only use 6B RMs, as this saves a lot of compute, and we found that 175B RM training could be
unstable and thus was less suitable to be used as the value function during RL (see Appendix C for
more details).
In Stiennon et al. (2020), the RM is trained on a dataset of comparisons between two model outputs
on the same input. They use a cross-entropy loss, with the comparisons as labels—the difference in
rewards represents the log odds that one response will be preferred to the other by a human labeler.
In order to speed up comparison collection,we present labelers with anywhere between K = 4 and
K = 9 responses to rank. This produces K
2 comparisons for each prompt shown to a labeler. Since
comparisons are very correlated within each labeling task, we found that if we simply shuffle the
5
comparisons into one dataset,
 a single pass over the dataset caused the reward model to overfit.
K
Instead, we train on all 2 comparisons from each prompt as a single batch element. This is much
more computationally efficient
because it only requires a single forward pass of the RM for each

completion (rather than K
forward
passes for K completions) and, because it no longer overfits, it
2
achieves much improved validation accuracy and log loss.
Specifically, the loss function for the reward model is:
1
loss (θ) = − K  E(x,yw ,yl )∼D [log (σ (rθ (x, yw ) − rθ (x, yl )))]

(1)

2

where rθ (x, y) is the scalar output of the reward model for prompt x and completion y with parameters
θ, yw is the preferred completion out of the pair of yw and yl , and D is the dataset of human
comparisons.

That is, if each of the possible K
comparisons is treated as a separate data point, then each completion
2
will potentially be used for K − 1 separate gradient updates. The model tends to overfit after a single epoch, so
repeating data within an epoch also causes it to overfit.
5

8



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 19 ---
5.3

Limitations

Methodology. The behavior of our InstructGPT models is determined in part by the human feedback
obtained from our contractors. Some of the labeling tasks rely on value judgments that may be
impacted by the identity of our contractors, their beliefs, cultural backgrounds, and personal history.
We hired about 40 contractors, guided by their performance on a screening test meant to judge how
well they could identify and respond to sensitive prompts, and their agreement rate with researchers
on a labeling task with detailed instructions (see Appendix B). We kept our team of contractors small
because this facilitates high-bandwidth communication with a smaller set of contractors who are
doing the task full-time. However, this group is clearly not representative of the full spectrum of
people who will use and be affected by our deployed models. As a simple example, our labelers are
primarily English-speaking and our data consists almost entirely of English instructions.
There are also many ways in which we could improve our data collection set-up. For instance, most
comparisons are only labeled by 1 contractor for cost reasons. Having examples labeled multiple
times could help identify areas where our contractors disagree, and thus where a single model is
unlikely to align to all of them. In cases of disagreement, aligning to the average labeler preference
may not be desirable. For example, when generating text that disproportionately affects a minority
group, we may want the preferences of labelers belonging to that group to be weighted more heavily.
Models. Our models are neither fully aligned nor fully safe; they still generate toxic or biased
outputs, make up facts, and generate sexual and violent content without explicit prompting. They can
also fail to generate reasonable outputs on some inputs; we show some examples of this in Figure 9.
Perhaps the greatest limitation of our models is that, in most cases, they follow the user’s instruction,
even if that could lead to harm in the real world. For example, when given a prompt instructing the
models to be maximally biased, InstructGPT generates more toxic outputs than equivalently-sized
GPT-3 models. We discuss potential mitigations in the following sections.
5.4

Open questions

This work is a first step towards using alignment techniques to fine-tune language models to follow a
wide range of instructions. There are many open questions to explore to further align language model
behavior with what people actually want them to do.
Many methods could be tried to further decrease the models’ propensity to generate toxic, biased,
or otherwise harmful outputs. For example, one could use an adversarial set-up where labelers find
the worst-case behaviors of the model, which are then labeled and added to the dataset (Dinan et al.,
2019b). One could also combine our method with ways of filtering the pretraining data (Ngo et al.,
2021), either for training the initial pretrained models, or for the data we use for our pretraining
mix approach. Similarly, one could combine our approach with methods that improve models’
truthfulness, such as WebGPT (Nakano et al., 2021).
In this work, if the user requests a potentially harmful or dishonest response, we allow our model to
generate these outputs. Training our model to be harmless despite user instructions is important, but
is also difficult because whether an output is harmful depends on the context in which it’s deployed;
for example, it may be beneficial to use language models to generate toxic outputs as part of a data
augmentation pipeline. Our techniques can also be applied to making models refuse certain user
instructions, and we plan to explore this in subsequent iterations of this research.
Getting models to do what we want is directly related to the steerability and controllability literature (Dathathri et al., 2019; Krause et al., 2020). A promising future path is combining RLHF with
other methods of steerability, for example using control codes (Keskar et al., 2019), or modifying the
sampling procedure at inference time using a smaller model (Dathathri et al., 2019).
While we mainly focus on RLHF, there are many other algorithms that could be used to train policies
on our demonstration and comparison data to get even better results. For example, one could explore
expert iteration (Anthony et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017), or simpler behavior cloning methods that
use a subset of the comparison data. One could also try constrained optimization approaches (Achiam
et al., 2017) that maximize the score from a reward model conditioned on generating a small number
of harmful behaviors.
19


ORIGINAL PDF: outputs/posttrain-design/ppo-reference/dpo-original.pdf
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.18290v3
VERSION: arXiv:2305.18290v3
PDF SHA256: 92cb3a2b71362acda98a789b03d88688fd33cf5fcf13f81d2b1de30ee7d3b67a
EXTRACTION: pdftotext version 25.03.0, actual PDF pages [1, 3, 4, 5]


--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 1 ---
Direct Preference Optimization:
Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model

arXiv:2305.18290v3 [cs.LG] 29 Jul 2024

Rafael Rafailov∗†

Archit Sharma∗†

Stefano Ermon†‡

Christopher D. Manning†

Eric Mitchell∗†
Chelsea Finn†

†

Stanford University ‡ CZ Biohub
{rafailov,architsh,eric.mitchell}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
While large-scale unsupervised language models (LMs) learn broad world knowledge and some reasoning skills, achieving precise control of their behavior is
difficult due to the completely unsupervised nature of their training. Existing
methods for gaining such steerability collect human labels of the relative quality of
model generations and fine-tune the unsupervised LM to align with these preferences, often with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However,
RLHF is a complex and often unstable procedure, first fitting a reward model that
reflects the human preferences, and then fine-tuning the large unsupervised LM
using reinforcement learning to maximize this estimated reward without drifting
too far from the original model. In this paper we introduce a new parameterization
of the reward model in RLHF that enables extraction of the corresponding optimal
policy in closed form, allowing us to solve the standard RLHF problem with only a
simple classification loss. The resulting algorithm, which we call Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), is stable, performant, and computationally lightweight,
eliminating the need for sampling from the LM during fine-tuning or performing
significant hyperparameter tuning. Our experiments show that DPO can fine-tune
LMs to align with human preferences as well as or better than existing methods.
Notably, fine-tuning with DPO exceeds PPO-based RLHF in ability to control sentiment of generations, and matches or improves response quality in summarization
and single-turn dialogue while being substantially simpler to implement and train.

1

Introduction

Large unsupervised language models (LMs) trained on very large datasets acquire surprising capabilities [11, 7, 42, 8]. However, these models are trained on data generated by humans with a wide variety
of goals, priorities, and skillsets. Some of these goals and skillsets may not be desirable to imitate; for
example, while we may want our AI coding assistant to understand common programming mistakes
in order to correct them, nevertheless, when generating code, we would like to bias our model toward
the (potentially rare) high-quality coding ability present in its training data. Similarly, we might want
our language model to be aware of a common misconception believed by 50% of people, but we
certainly do not want the model to claim this misconception to be true in 50% of queries about it!
In other words, selecting the model’s desired responses and behavior from its very wide knowledge
and abilities is crucial to building AI systems that are safe, performant, and controllable [28]. While
existing methods typically steer LMs to match human preferences using reinforcement learning (RL),
∗

Equal contribution; more junior authors listed earlier.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 3 ---
Bradley-Terry model [5], then fine-tune a language model to maximize the given reward using
reinforcement learning algorithms, commonly REINFORCE [47], proximal policy optimization
(PPO; [39]), or variants [34]. A closely-related line of work leverages LLMs fine-tuned for instruction
following with human feedback to generate additional synthetic preference data for targeted attributes
such as safety or harmlessness [2], using only weak supervision from humans in the form of a
text rubric for the LLM’s annotations. These methods represent a convergence of two bodies of
work: one body of work on training language models with reinforcement learning for a variety
of objectives [35, 29, 48] and another body of work on general methods for learning from human
preferences [12, 21]. Despite the appeal of using relative human preferences, fine-tuning large
language models with reinforcement learning remains a major practical challenge; this work provides
a theoretically-justified approach to optimizing relative preferences without RL.
Outside of the context of language, learning policies from preferences has been studied in both bandit
and reinforcement learning settings, and several approaches have been proposed. Contextual bandit
learning using preferences or rankings of actions, rather than rewards, is known as a contextual
dueling bandit (CDB; [50, 14]). In the absence of absolute rewards, theoretical analysis of CDBs
substitutes the notion of an optimal policy with a von Neumann winner, a policy whose expected win
rate against any other policy is at least 50% [14]. However, in the CDB setting, preference labels
are given online, while in learning from human preferences, we typically learn from a fixed batch of
offline preference-annotated action pairs [49]. Similarly, preference-based RL (PbRL) learns from
binary preferences generated by an unknown ‘scoring’ function rather than rewards [9, 37]. Various
algorithms for PbRL exist, including methods that can reuse off-policy preference data, but generally
involve first explicitly estimating the latent scoring function (i.e. the reward model) and subsequently
optimizing it [16, 9, 12, 36, 21]. We instead present a single stage policy learning approach that
directly optimizes a policy to satisfy preferences.

3

Preliminaries

We review the RLHF pipeline in Ziegler et al. (and later [40, 1, 28]). It usually includes three phases:
1) supervised fine-tuning (SFT); 2) preference sampling and reward learning and 3) RL optimization.
SFT: RLHF typically begins by fine-tuning a pre-trained LM with supervised learning on high-quality
data for the downstream task(s) of interest (dialogue, summarization, etc.), to obtain a model π SFT .
Reward Modelling Phase: In the second phase the SFT model is prompted with prompts x to
produce pairs of answers (y1 , y2 ) ∼ π SFT (y | x). These are then presented to human labelers
who express preferences for one answer, denoted as yw ≻ yl | x where yw and yl denotes the
preferred and dispreferred completion amongst (y1 , y2 ) respectively. The preferences are assumed
to be generated by some latent reward model r∗ (y, x), which we do not have access to. There are a
number of approaches used to model preferences, the Bradley-Terry (BT) [5] model being a popular
choice (although more general Plackett-Luce ranking models [32, 23] are also compatible with the
framework if we have access to several ranked answers). The BT model stipulates that the human
preference distribution p∗ can be written as:
p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) =

exp (r∗ (x, y1 ))
.
∗
exp (r (x, y1 )) + exp (r∗ (x, y2 ))

(1)


(i) (i) N
Assuming access to a static dataset of comparisons D = x(i) , yw , yl i=1 sampled from p∗ , we
can parametrize a reward model rϕ (x, y) and estimate the parameters via maximum likelihood.
Framing the problem as a binary classification we have the negative log-likelihood loss:


LR (rϕ , D) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ(rϕ (x, yw ) − rϕ (x, yl ))
(2)
where σ is the logistic function. In the context of LMs, the network rϕ (x, y) is often initialized from
the SFT model π SFT (y | x) with the addition of a linear layer on top of the final transformer layer
that produces a single scalar prediction for the reward value [51]. To ensure a reward function with
lower variance, prior works normalize the rewards, such that Ex,y∼D [rϕ (x, y)] = 0 for all x.
RL Fine-Tuning Phase: During the RL phase, the learned reward function is used to provide
feedback to the language model. Following prior works [17, 18], the optimization is formulated as




max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) rϕ (x, y) − βDKL πθ (y | x) || πref (y | x) ,
(3)
πθ

3



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 4 ---
where β is a parameter controlling the deviation from the base reference policy πref , namely the initial SFT model π SFT . In practice, the language model policy πθ is also initialized to π SFT . The
added constraint is important, as it prevents the model from deviating too far from the distribution on which the reward model is accurate, as well as maintaining the generation diversity
and preventing mode-collapse to single high-reward answers. Due to the discrete nature of language generation, this objective is not differentiable and is typically optimized with reinforcement learning. The standard approach [51, 40, 1, 28] has been to construct the reward function
r(x, y) = rϕ (x, y) − β(log πθ (y | x) − log πref (y | x)), and maximize using PPO [39].

4

Direct Preference Optimization

Motivated by the challenges of applying reinforcement learning algorithms on large-scale problems
such as fine-tuning language models, our goal is to derive a simple approach for policy optimization
using preferences directly. Unlike prior RLHF methods, which learn a reward and then optimize it
via RL, our approach leverages a particular choice of reward model parameterization that enables
extraction of its optimal policy in closed form, without an RL training loop. As we will describe
next in detail, our key insight is to leverage an analytical mapping from reward functions to optimal
policies, which enables us to transform a loss function over reward functions into a loss function
over policies. This change-of-variables approach avoids fitting an explicit, standalone reward model,
while still optimizing under existing models of human preferences, such as the Bradley-Terry model.
In essence, the policy network represents both the language model and the (implicit) reward.
Deriving the DPO objective. We start with the same RL objective as prior work, Eq. 3, under a
general reward function r. Following prior work [31, 30, 19, 15], it is straightforward to show that
the optimal solution to the KL-constrained reward maximization objective in Eq. 3 takes the form:


1
1
πr (y | x) =
πref (y | x) exp
r(x, y) ,
(4)
Z(x)
β


P
where Z(x) = y πref (y | x) exp β1 r(x, y) is the partition function. See Appendix A.1 for a
complete derivation. Even if we use the MLE estimate rϕ of the ground-truth reward function r∗ , it is
still expensive to estimate the partition function Z(x) [19, 15], which makes this representation hard
to utilize in practice. However, we can rearrange Eq. 4 to express the reward function in terms of its
corresponding optimal policy πr , the reference policy πref , and the unknown partition function Z(·).
Specifically, we first take the logarithm of both sides of Eq. 4 and then with some algebra we obtain:
r(x, y) = β log

πr (y | x)
+ β log Z(x).
πref (y | x)

(5)

We can apply this reparameterization to the ground-truth reward r∗ and corresponding optimal model
π ∗ . Fortunately, the Bradley-Terry model depends only on the difference of rewards between two
completions, i.e., p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) = σ(r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 )). Substituting the reparameterization
in Eq. 5 for r∗ (x, y) into the preference model Eq. 1, the partition function cancels, and we can
express the human preference probability in terms of only the optimal policy π ∗ and reference policy
πref . Thus, the optimal RLHF policy π ∗ under the Bradley-Terry model satisfies the preference model:
1

p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 | x) =
1 + exp



∗
π ∗ (y1 |x)
2 |x)
β log ππref(y
(y2 |x) − β log πref (y1 |x)



(6)

The derivation is in Appendix A.2. While Eq. 6 uses the Bradley-Terry model, we can similarly
derive expressions under the more general Plackett-Luce models [32, 23], shown in Appendix A.3.
Now that we have the probability of human preference data in terms of the optimal policy rather than
the reward model, we can formulate a maximum likelihood objective for a parametrized policy πθ .
Analogous to the reward modeling approach (i.e. Eq. 2), our policy objective becomes:



πθ (yl | x)
πθ (yw | x)
LDPO (πθ ; πref ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼D log σ β log
− β log
.
(7)
πref (yw | x)
πref (yl | x)
This way, we fit an implicit reward using an alternative parameterization, whose optimal policy is
simply πθ . Moreover, since our procedure is equivalent to fitting a reparametrized Bradley-Terry
4



--- ORIGINAL PDF PAGE 5 ---
model, it enjoys certain theoretical properties, such as consistencies under suitable assumption of the
preference data distribution [4]. In Section 5, we further discuss theoretical properties of DPO in
relation to other works.
What does the DPO update do? For a mechanistic understanding of DPO, it is useful to analyze the
gradient of the loss function LDPO . The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:
∇θ LDPO (πθ ; πref ) =

− βE(x,yw ,yl )∼D
σ(r̂θ (x, yl ) − r̂θ (x, yw ))
{z
}
|



higher weight when reward estimate is wrong


∇θ log π(yw | x) − ∇θ log π(yl | x) ,
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

increase likelihood of yw

decrease likelihood of yl

where r̂θ (x, y) = β log ππrefθ (y|x)
(y|x) is the reward implicitly defined by the language model πθ and reference model πref (more in Section 5). Intuitively, the gradient of the loss function LDPO increases the
likelihood of the preferred completions yw and decreases the likelihood of dispreferred completions
yl . Importantly, the examples are weighed by how much higher the implicit reward model r̂θ rates
the dispreferred completions, scaled by β, i.e, how incorrectly the implicit reward model orders
the completions, accounting for the strength of the KL constraint. Our experiments suggest the
importance of this weighting, as a naïve version of this method without the weighting coefficient can
cause the language model to degenerate (Appendix Table 3).
DPO outline. The general DPO pipeline is as follows: 1) Sample completions y1 , y2 ∼ πref (· | x)
for every prompt x, label with human preferences to construct the offline dataset of preferences
(i)
D = {x(i) , yw , yl )(i) }N
i=1 and 2) optimize the language model πθ to minimize LDPO for the given
πref and D and desired β. In practice, one would like to reuse preference datasets publicly available,
rather than generating samples and gathering human preferences. Since the preference datasets
are sampled using π SFT , we initialize πref = π SFT whenever available. However, when π SFT is
not available, we initialize πref by maximizing likelihood of preferred completions (x, yw ), that
is, πref = arg maxπ Ex,yw ∼D [log π(yw | x)]. This procedure helps mitigate the distribution shift
between the true reference distribution which is unavailable, and πref used by DPO. Further details
related to the implementation and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix B.

5

Theoretical Analysis of DPO

In this section, we give further interpretation of the DPO method, provide theoretical backing, and
relate advantages of DPO to issues with actor critic algorithms used for RLHF (such as PPO [39]).
5.1

Your Language Model Is Secretly a Reward Model

DPO is able to bypass both fitting an explicit reward and performing RL to learn the policy using
a single maximum likelihood objective. Note the optimization objective Eq. 5 is equivalent to a
π ∗ (y|x)
Bradley-Terry model with a reward parameterization r∗ (x, y) = β log πrefθ (y|x) and we optimize our
parametric model πθ , equivalently to the reward model optimization in Eq. 2 under the change of
variables. In this section we will build the theory behind this reparameterization, show that it does
not constrain the class of learned reward models, and allows for the exact recovery of the optimal
policy. We begin with by defining an equivalence relation between reward functions.
Definition 1. We say that two reward functions r(x, y) and r′ (x, y) are equivalent iff
r(x, y) − r′ (x, y) = f (x) for some function f .
It is easy to see that this is indeed an equivalence relation, which partitions the set of reward functions
into classes. We can state the following two lemmas:
Lemma 1. Under the Plackett-Luce, and in particular the Bradley-Terry, preference framework, two
reward functions from the same class induce the same preference distribution.
Lemma 2. Two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same optimal policy
under the constrained RL problem.
The proofs are straightforward and we defer them to Appendix A.5. The first lemma is a well-known
under-specification issue with the Plackett-Luce family of models [32]. Due to this under-specification,
5

