model, it enjoys certain theoretical properties, such as consistencies under suitable assumption of the
preference data distribution [4]. In Section 5, we further discuss theoretical properties of DPO in
relation to other works.
What does the DPO update do? For a mechanistic understanding of DPO, it is useful to analyze the
gradient of the loss function LDPO . The gradient with respect to the parameters θ can be written as:

    ∇θ LDPO (πθ ; πref ) =
                                                                                                             
    − βE(x,yw ,yl )∼D      σ(r̂θ (x, yl ) − r̂θ (x, yw ))                  ∇θ log π(yw | x) − ∇θ log π(yl | x) ,
                           |             {z             }                  |      {z      }   |     {z       }
                         higher weight when reward estimate is wrong       increase likelihood of yw   decrease likelihood of yl

where r̂θ (x, y) = β log ππrefθ (y|x)
                                (y|x) is the reward implicitly defined by the language model πθ and refer-
ence model πref (more in Section 5). Intuitively, the gradient of the loss function LDPO increases the
likelihood of the preferred completions yw and decreases the likelihood of dispreferred completions
yl . Importantly, the examples are weighed by how much higher the implicit reward model r̂θ rates
the dispreferred completions, scaled by β, i.e, how incorrectly the implicit reward model orders
the completions, accounting for the strength of the KL constraint. Our experiments suggest the
importance of this weighting, as a naïve version of this method without the weighting coefficient can
cause the language model to degenerate (Appendix Table 3).
DPO outline. The general DPO pipeline is as follows: 1) Sample completions y1 , y2 ∼ πref (· | x)
for every prompt x, label with human preferences to construct the offline dataset of preferences
              (i)
D = {x(i) , yw , yl )(i) }N
                          i=1 and 2) optimize the language model πθ to minimize LDPO for the given
πref and D and desired β. In practice, one would like to reuse preference datasets publicly available,
rather than generating samples and gathering human preferences. Since the preference datasets
are sampled using π SFT , we initialize πref = π SFT whenever available. However, when π SFT is
not available, we initialize πref by maximizing likelihood of preferred completions (x, yw ), that
is, πref = arg maxπ Ex,yw ∼D [log π(yw | x)]. This procedure helps mitigate the distribution shift
between the true reference distribution which is unavailable, and πref used by DPO. Further details
related to the implementation and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix B.

5     Theoretical Analysis of DPO
In this section, we give further interpretation of the DPO method, provide theoretical backing, and
relate advantages of DPO to issues with actor critic algorithms used for RLHF (such as PPO [39]).

5.1     Your Language Model Is Secretly a Reward Model

DPO is able to bypass both fitting an explicit reward and performing RL to learn the policy using
a single maximum likelihood objective. Note the optimization objective Eq. 5 is equivalent to a
                                                                        π ∗ (y|x)
Bradley-Terry model with a reward parameterization r∗ (x, y) = β log πrefθ (y|x) and we optimize our
parametric model πθ , equivalently to the reward model optimization in Eq. 2 under the change of
variables. In this section we will build the theory behind this reparameterization, show that it does
not constrain the class of learned reward models, and allows for the exact recovery of the optimal
policy. We begin with by defining an equivalence relation between reward functions.
Definition 1. We say that two reward functions r(x, y) and r′ (x, y) are equivalent iff
r(x, y) − r′ (x, y) = f (x) for some function f .

It is easy to see that this is indeed an equivalence relation, which partitions the set of reward functions
into classes. We can state the following two lemmas:
Lemma 1. Under the Plackett-Luce, and in particular the Bradley-Terry, preference framework, two
reward functions from the same class induce the same preference distribution.
Lemma 2. Two reward functions from the same equivalence class induce the same optimal policy
under the constrained RL problem.

The proofs are straightforward and we defer them to Appendix A.5. The first lemma is a well-known
under-specification issue with the Plackett-Luce family of models [32]. Due to this under-specification,


                                                               5
we usually have to impose additional identifiability constraints to achieve any guarantees on the MLE
estimates from Eq. 2 [4]. The second lemma states that all reward functions from the same class
yield the same optimal policy, hence for our final objective, we are only interested in recovering an
arbitrary reward function from the optimal class. We prove the following Theorem in Appendix A.6:
Theorem 1. Under mild assumptions, all reward classes consistent with the Plackett-Luce
(and Bradley-Terry in particular) models can be represented with the reparameterization
r(x, y) = β log ππ(y|x)
                 ref (y|x)
                           for some model π(y | x) and a given reference model πref (y | x).

Proof Sketch. Consider any reward function r(x, y), which induces a corresponding optimal model
πr (y | x), specified by Eq. 4. We will show that a reward function from the equivalence class of r
can be represented using the reparameterization given above. We define the projection f as
                                                                                     
                                                        X                    1
                f (r; πref , β)(x, y) = r(x, y) − β log   πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y)          (8)
                                                        y
                                                                             β

The operator f simply normalizes the reward function with the logarithm of the partition function
of πr . Since the added normalization term is only a function of the prefix x, f (r; πref , β)(x, y) is a
reward function in the equivalence class of r(x, y). Finally, replacing r with the RHS of Eq. 5 (which
holds for any reward function), we have f (r; πref , β)(x, y) = β log ππrefr (y|x)
                                                                             (y|x) . That is, the projection
f produces a member of the equivalence class of r with the desired form, and we do not lose any
generality in our reward model from the proposed reparameterization.

We can alternatively view Theorem 1 as specifying exactly which reward function within each
equivalence class the DPO reparameterization selects, that is, the reward function satisfying:
                                                             
                              X                     1
                                 πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y) = 1,                             (9)
                               y |
                                                    β
                                                {z             }
                                        =π(y|x), using Thm. 1 reparam.

i.e., π(y | x) is a valid distribution (probabilities are positive and sum to 1). However, following
Eq. 4, we can see that Eq. 9 is the partition function of the optimal policy induced by the reward
function r(x, y). The key insight of the DPO algorithm is that we can impose certain constraints on
the under-constrained Plackett-Luce (and Bradley-Terry in particular) family of preference models,
such that we preserve the class of representable reward models, but explicitly make the optimal policy
in Eq. 4 analytically tractable for all prompts x.

5.2   Instability of Actor-Critic Algorithms

We can also use our framework to diagnose instabilities with standard actor-critic algorithms used
for the RLHF, such as PPO. We follow the RLHF pipeline and focus on the RL fine-tuning step
outlined in Section 3. We can draw connections to the control as inference framework [22] for the
constrained RL problem outlined in 3. We assume a parameterized model πθ (y | x) and minimize
DKL [πθ (y|x) || π ∗ (y | x)] where π ∗ is the optimal policy from Eq. 7 induced by the reward function
rϕ (y, x). With some algebra this leads to the optimization objective:
                                                                                              
                                         X                      1                   πθ (y | x)
     max Eπθ (y|x) rϕ (x, y) − β log         πref (y | x) exp     rϕ (x, y) − β log                (10)
       πθ
                                          y
                                                                β                   πref (y | x)
                                                                              |      {z        }
                                                                                      KL
                      |                         {z                         }
                                           f (rϕ ,πref ,β)

This is the same objective optimized in prior works [51, 40, 1, 28] using the DPO-equivalent reward
for the reward class of rϕ . In this setting, we can interpret the normalization term in f (rϕ , πref , β)
as the soft value function of the reference policy πref . While this term does not affect the optimal
solution, without it, the policy gradient of the objective could have high variance, making learning
unstable. We can accommodate for the normalization term using a learned value function, but that
can also be difficult to optimize. Alternatively, prior works have normalized rewards using a human
completion baseline, essentially a single sample Monte-Carlo estimate of the normalizing term. In
contrast the DPO reparameterization yields a reward function that does not require any baselines.


                                                        6
