             DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and
                     Contrasting Images

    Yasumasa Onoe1† , Sunayana Rane2†∗ , Zachary Berger1 , Yonatan Bitton1 ,
        Jaemin Cho3∗ , Roopal Garg1 , Alexander Ku1,2 , Zarana Parekh1 ,
     Jordi Pont-Tuset1 , Garrett Tanzer1 , Su Wang1 , and Jason Baldridge1
                     1
                         Google, 2 Princeton University, 3 UNC Chapel Hill
                               https://google.github.io/docci


           Abstract. Vision-language datasets are vital for both text-to-image
           (T2I) and image-to-text (I2T) research. However, current datasets lack
           descriptions with fine-grained detail that would allow for richer associa-
           tions to be learned by models. To fill the gap, we introduce Descriptions
           of Connected and Contrasting Images (DOCCI), a dataset with
           long, human-annotated English descriptions for 15k images that were
           taken, curated and donated by a single researcher intent on capturing
           key challenges such as spatial relations, counting, text rendering, world
           knowledge, and more. We instruct human annotators to create compre-
           hensive descriptions for each image; these average 136 words in length
           and are crafted to clearly distinguish each image from those that are
           related or similar. Each description is highly compositional and typically
           encompasses multiple challenges. Through both quantitative and qualita-
           tive analyses, we demonstrate that DOCCI serves as an effective training
           resource for image-to-text generation – a PaLI 5B model finetuned on
           DOCCI shows equal or superior results compared to highly-performant
           larger models like LLaVA-1.5 7B and InstructBLIP 7B. Furthermore,
           we show that DOCCI is a useful testbed for text-to-image generation,
           highlighting the limitations of current text-to-image models in capturing
           long descriptions and fine details.


1        Introduction

The past several years has produced a continual, marked evolution of text-to-
image (T2I) generation models (e.g. [6,48,49,51,64], and many more), leading to
not only improved capabilities and progress on research benchmarks, but deploy-
ment in user-facing applications (e.g., [1, 38, 42, 49], and many more). Neverthe-
less, even the best current models still exhibit weaknesses in key areas, including
precise handling of spatial relationships between objects, correct object count-
ing, and accurate text rendering [4,13,34,64]. As we look to improve our research
understanding of T2I models and the impact of their limitations on real-world
applications, it is essential to identify their weaknesses precisely and efficiently.
    Many test prompt sets have been developed [11,12,51,61,64] to assess model
behaviors in a controlled manner (e.g., image-text alignment). The common
    †
        Equal contribution. ∗ Work done as a Student Researcher at Google.
2              Y. Onoe et al.

 A front view of a 1950s Chevrolet 210 is shown in the right half of the frame. The car,
 in faded baby blue, is parked on a field of dry grass. The car is equipped with round
 headlights on both its left and right sides, with a silver emblem positioned between
 them. The front grille and bumper of the car, originally polished silver, are beginning
 to rust in the small crevices. A hood ornament is attached to the car's bonnet, and the
 roof and A pillars are painted in white. On the right side of the car in front of the car's
 left front tire, there is a rough-cut square brick sitting, keeping the car in place. Behind
 the blue Chevy, on the left side of the frame, there is a barber shop with brown walls
 and windows. On the side wall of the barber shop, it says, "A Barber Shop is Old
 School But Never Old Fashioned." Under the "But Never," there is a drawing of a
 traditional barber's blade. On the left side of the "Old Fashioned," there is a drawing
 of scissors which are facing a United States flag that is sitting behind a window. To the
 left of the window, the text "A Shave, Haircut the Works" is written in smaller font.
 The sky is colored baby blue and partially obscured by altocumulus clouds. To the
 right of both, several green trees are visible. Daytime shot below eye-level, taken at
 the height of the car's hood.

Key Details of the Image
 Objects & Attributes             Key Objects and Attributes: color, material, texture, shape, size, count, pose, action, state etc.
 Spatial Relationships            Orientation: locations in the image; Direction: relative directions in which objects are facing.
     Text Rendering               Text on different materials and surfaces with different styles (e.g., fonts, handwriting)
    World Knowledge               Named entities that require background knowledge (e.g., 1950s Chevrolet 210)
      View / Scene                Camera view and angle (e.g., eye-level view) and scene settings (e.g., indoor/outdoor, day/night)


Fig. 1: An example detailed description of a DOCCI image. The color of the text corre-
sponds to each aspect of the details listed below the description. A more comprehensive
list is presented in Appendix B. NOTE: this figure illustrates rich visual information
in our descriptions, but we do not annotate spans with these information types.
practice involves generating images for test prompts and then obtaining au-
tomatic evaluation scores, either through embedding-based approaches [21] or
VQA-based approaches [11, 23, 62]. But, these test prompts are often simplistic
and fail to specify critical details, such as the orientation, direction, and fine-
grained attributes of the key visual subjects (e.g., “a cat standing on a horse”
can be as specifically described as “a left-facing grey British short-hair perched
on a white and brown-spotted Mustang horse.”). Crucially, these prompt sets lack
ground-truth images, making it impossible to directly compare generated images
with corresponding reference images. One way to address this issue is to use ex-
isting human-annotated image-caption datasets like COCO [36]. Unfortunately,
the captions in these datasets are typically brief (e.g., COCO captions average
around 10 words) and lack details of the visual features in the images. The re-
cently introduced Densely Captioned Images (DCI) dataset provides descriptions
with over 1,000 words per image [59]. But, those descriptions concatenate short
captions of image segments, which lack rich linguistic structures and coherence.
Additionally, their images are sampled from SA-1B [29], which were not taken
specifically with the intent of evaluating T2I models.
    To fill this gap, we introduce a new vision-language dataset, Descriptions
of Connected and Contrasting Images (DOCCI, pronounced doh-chee).
Fig. 1 demonstrates the level of detail included in our descriptions, including
its coverage of multiple aspects of the image. DOCCI contains 15k images – all
taken, selected, framed and curated by one of the authors – along with manu-
ally annotated detailed text descriptions. The images were taken intentionally
to help assess precise visual properties such as complex attribute-object bind-
ing, spatial relationships, multimedia blending, counting, and different types of
optical effects. The complexity of images varies from very simple ones (text on
                     DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images                           3

Same subjects with different spatial relationships and other
aspects




    Orientation             Pose           Background         Action          With Other Object

Arranged objects for counting and spatial relationships




   Same Objects      Colors and Numbers   Arranged Text    Many Objects     Complex Orientations

Naturally occurring contextualized text rendering




       Paint           Channel Letters       Carved            Tile                    Stamp

Mix of multiple aspects combining multiple objects with remarkable configurations




  Rare Combination     Optical Effect     Mixed Media     World Knowledge   Words, Objects, and Reflection




Fig. 2: Examples of related images. DOCCI images were intentionally collected to
have substantially similar, contextually related groups of distractor images. The text
descriptions must be detailed enough to differentiate each image from related ones.


a blackboard) to highly complex ones (detailed street wall murals and their sur-
rounding context). Additionally, there are multiple images of the same or similar
objects, e.g., each with slight differences in their spatial orientations and counts,
in line with the concept of contrast sets [19]. This approach enables a precise
and localized investigation of model behaviors, thereby making the evaluation
more rigorous and challenging. DOCCI images are free of personally identifiable
information (PII) and will be donated to the public domain under the CC-
BY license. Equipped with the newly-curated images and detailed descriptions,
DOCCI covers a wide range of outstanding issues of T2I models.
    Annotating detailed yet concise descriptions for images from scratch is chal-
lenging. For efficiency, we divide the text annotation process into three stages
(see Figure 3). In the first stage, annotators to write short descriptions of objects
based on the predefined rubric, ensuring they capture all the salient details. The
second stage consolidates those short descriptions into one detailed, coherent
natural language description. The final stage enriches the description by adding
important details such as colors, textures, and the relationships between vari-
ous elements. We rigorously implement quality control steps to ensure that each
description meets our high standards of annotation.
4       Y. Onoe et al.

    We evaluate current highly-performant T2I and I2T models with DOCCI to
conduct both quantitative and qualitative analyses. We first demonstrate that,
combining with a sample efficient model such as PaLI 5B, DOCCI can greatly
improve I2T generation. To assess this, we introduce a framework for evaluating
long image descriptions, including the side-by-side human evaluation setup with
the precision (i.e., hallucinations) and recall (i.e., details) ratings. Our experi-
mental results also show that the T2I models still exhibit numerous error modes
including those related to spatial relationships, counting, and text rendering.
We show that the limited input length of most T2I models is problematic as it
causes significant parts of the description (i.e., prompt) to be omitted, making
it impossible to include those details in the generated image. We also show the
unreliability of automatic metrics such as FID [22] and CLIPScore [21], which
do not align with the results of our human evaluation.

2     Dataset Construction

DOCCI is unique in its curation and annotation, as described overall in this
section and in Appendix C in further detail.

2.1   Images

We summarize briefly the collection and curation of DOCCI images. See Ap-
pendix A for more detailed discussion. All 15k annotated DOCCI images were
taken by one of the authors, Jason Baldridge, and his family. The majority of
these images were taken in the United States, spanning over fifteen states (es-
pecially California, Florida, Nevada, New York, Arkansas and Texas), and a few
were taken in other countries. Most images are natural scenes captured in both
indoor and outdoor settings and feature different types of lighting conditions.
The choice of subjects was driven largely by opportunity – interesting scenes and
things encountered over the course of August 2021 to September 2022, as well
as a selection of relevant images taken before that period. Additionally, many
images were specifically arranged or framed to test known limitations of text-
to-image models, such as counting and spatial relationships and mixed media
images (e.g. an image of a cat shown on a TV with a live cat in front of the TV).
The images range from very complex ones containing intricate murals fronted by
plants and signs, to quite simple ones like short handwritten words in chalk on
pavement. Since the images capture everyday scenes, common objects include
domestic/wild animals, plants, artwork, vehicles, toys, and elements of natural
and urban landscapes (e.g., rivers, rocks, and buildings).
    Most images are captured using an iPhone camera in landscape or portrait
orientation. Typically, their size is 2048×1536 pixels, but some are smaller due
to cropping that ensured the focus was on a specific element in the original
shot. In addition, we release 8,932 unannotated DOCCI-AAR images curated
in similar fashion from October 2022 to November 2023. These images also span
multiple regions of the USA (especially New York, Texas, California, Michigan,
Arkansas, and Arizona) but also include a large number of images from Canada,
                                          DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images                                                                                                             5

                   Stage 1                                                         Stage 2                                                    Stage 3
         Extracting Key Information                                          Writing Descriptions                                    Elaborating Descriptions
                                                             Object1: 1950s Chevrolet 210 on a dry glass field           Version 1: The medium shot view of a blue
                                                             Object2: A barber shop with a brown wall                    Chevrolet Bel Air car parked on the ground and
Input                                                        Text: Text on the wall "A Barber Shop is …"                 dried grass around. The text “A BARBER SHOP IS
                                                                                                                         OLD SCHOOL BUT NEVER OLD FASHIONED” …




                                Annotator                                                      Annotator                                                        Annotator
                                 Pool A                                                         Pool B                                                           Pool C

         Object1: 1950s Chevrolet 210 on a dry glass field              Version 1: The medium shot view of a blue         Final: A front view of a 1950s Chevrolet 210 is shown in the right half of the
Output   Object2: A barber shop with a brown wall                       Chevrolet Bel Air car parked on the ground and    frame. The car, in faded baby blue, is parked on a field of dry grass. The car is
                                                                                                                          equipped with round headlights on both its left and right sides, with a silver
         Text: Text on the wall "A Barber Shop is …"                    dried grass around. The text “A BARBER SHOP IS
                                                                                                                          emblem positioned between them. The front grille and bumper of the car,
                                                                        OLD SCHOOL BUT NEVER OLD FASHIONED” …             originally polished silver, are beginning to rust in the small crevices. A hood
                                                                                                                          ornament is attached to the car's bonnet, and the roof and A pillars are painted
                                                                                                                          in white. On the right side of the car in front of the car's left front tire …




Fig. 3: Data Annotation Process. Stage 1 : extract the key aspects, such as objects,
from the image and write short descriptions. Stage 2 : extend and combine these short
descriptions into one overall description. Stage 3 : elaborate and refine the description.
Germany, Switzerland, and France. These images are not constrained to por-
trait or landscape mode; instead, they are cropped to select the most salient
components and thus cover arbitrary aspect ratios (AAR).
    Given the nature of their collection, DOCCI’s images necessarily are a biased
sample in terms of content and geographical extent. We hope others will donate
images in similar fashion to expand the visual diversity available for research.
Contrastive Images Figure 2 shows examples of related images in DOCCI.
The images were intentionally collected to include groups of related, substantially
similar distractor images. For instance, a group of images depicts the same cats
but in different orientations, poses, and actions. There could be several images
of green apples placed on a table in various numbers and arrangements. Words,
characters, and numbers can appear on various surfaces or materials, such as
paper, brick walls, and stone, in diverse formats, including print, stickers, and
handwriting. Those similar images are intentionally taken to challenge both T2I
and I2T models, to test if they can correctly reflect the details in either direction.
Reoccurring Entities There are 15 distinct entities that occur in multiple
images, including specific cats, dogs, vehicles and graffiti tags. All instances of
these entities are tagged with their corresponding images in the dataset, and we
will release these for future work on consistent character generation with DOCCI
using methods like DreamBooth [50] (and its descendants).
License and Privacy As noted, the DOCCI images were donated by a single
person who has granted them for public release under the CC-BY 4.0 license.
Very few images, as taken, contained personally identifiable information (PII).
We manually reviewed all images for PII. We removed some images and otherwise
scrubbed any detected faces, phone numbers, and URLs by blurring them.

2.2       Text Descriptions

We hypothesize that good descriptions include sufficient details of the key ob-
jects and their attributes as well as salient information of secondary objects and
background. In addition, a good description should be well-organized and read
like a newspaper article: important information is covered in early sentences,
while secondary information is mentioned later, thereby effectively triaging key
details. To clarify the goal of our annotation task, we focus on the key visual
6        Y. Onoe et al.

Table 1: Statistics for DOCCI and other datasets. #Words and #Sent. give the average
number of words and sentences per description, respectively. For DCI, we only use the
overall descriptions (see [59], Section 3.2) and exclude descriptions of submasks.

                                    Images                        Descriptions
    Dataset                     Sources          Size      Size     #Words #Sent.
    DOCCI (ours)          Author donation        14,847    14,847      135.9      7.1
    DCI (overall)         SA-1B                   8,012     8,012      144.7     10.1
    Stanford Vis. Par.    COCO, Visual Genome    19,561    19,561       68.5      6.3
    Localized Narratives COCO, Open Images      848,749   873,107       41.0      2.6
    COCO                 COCO                   123,287   616,767       11.3      1.0


features such as objects, attributes, spatial relationships, text render-
ing, counting, world knowledge, scenes, views, and optical effects. See
Appendix B for further detail on annotation interfaces and guidelines.
Annotation Protocol Writing detailed and high-quality descriptions for im-
ages demands a broad skill set, including extensive knowledge about various
objects and proficient writing skills. During pilot studies, it was clear that com-
posing a detailed description of an image from scratch is time-consuming and
tiring, even for expert annotators. To enhance efficiency, we divide our anno-
tation process into three stages (Figure 3), distributing the required skills and
workload more effectively. In the first stage, we extract the key aspects (e.g., the
main objects and their attributes) and create concise descriptions of each. In
the second stage, we combine these brief descriptions into a preliminary draft.
Finally, in the third stage, we add further detail and refine the description.

3     Dataset Analysis

We analyze the features, functionalities and quality of DOCCI, and compare
it with existing datasets including DCI [59], Stanford Visual Paragraphs [31],
Localized Narratives [46], and COCO Captions [36].

3.1     Dataset Statistics

Table 1 lists key statistics for DOCCI and prior datasets. On average, DOCCI’s
descriptions are substantially longer than those in the Stanford Visual Para-
graphs dataset and have similar length to DCI’s. However, the average sen-
tence count in DOCCI descriptions is lower than in DCI: DOCCI’s sentences are
denser. This discrepancy becomes even larger when compared to larger datasets
such as Localized Narratives and COCO, which are less detailed.
    We further investigate the length of the descriptions, as this serves as a
reliable proxy for identifying recall errors (i.e., missing information). Figure 4
displays the distribution of description lengths across each dataset. DOCCI has
the highest median description length compared to other datasets, including
DCI (which has the highest mean). The plot reveals the presence of outlier
descriptions exceeding 1,000 words in DCI – which elevate its mean length.
                        DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images                                7

              DOCCI
        DCI (overall)
   Stanford Vis. Par.
Localized Narratives
              COCO
                        0           200         400              600              800              1000
                                            Description/Caption Length (#words)

Fig. 4: The distribution of description lengths. The x-axis represents the number of
words, and the vertical dotted lines in the violin plot indicate quartiles.
Table 2: The percentage of descriptions that contain each challenge type and the av-
erage count of that particular challenge type per image. Additionally, we show boxplots
depicting the distributions of each challenge type over all images.

    Challenge Type          Descriptions (%) Avg.                   action
                                                          attribute - color
    action                        20.9        0.3     attribute - material
    attribute - color             97.3        5.3
                                                        attribute - shape
    attribute - material          60.9        1.3
                                                           attribute - size
    attribute - shape
    attribute - size
                                  62.1
                                  47.4
                                              1.4
                                              0.9
                                                          attribute - state
    attribute - state             97.8        5.3      attribute - texture
    attribute - texture           25.7        0.3                counting
    counting                      54.6        1.0                   object
    object                       100.0       17.7     scene/view/lighting
    scene/view/lighting           63.6        1.2                   spatial
    spatial                       99.9       11.5          text rendering
    text rendering                23.3        0.4       world knowledge
    world knowledge               76.2        2.0                             0    10   20    30     40   50   60
                                                                                             Count
    We split DOCCI into four sets: 9,647 train, 5,000 test, 100 qualification-
dev, and 100 qualification-test. The test set is intended for computing au-
tomatic metrics. The qualification sets comprise manually selected images that
specifically test prominent challenges in T2I models, intended for manual in-
spection or human evaluation. QUAL-DEV can be used by experimenters for
their own qualitative comparisons. QUAL-TEST is intended to be held out for
rating by human judges. We also split the DOCCI-AAR images into 3,932
train and 5,000 test sets, with the expectation that this will facilitate future
experiments with automatic high-quality captioning (or, we hope, further human
annotation).
3.2      Challenge Types
DOCCI’s descriptions cover various types of challenges for T2I models, and
one description can contain multiple challenges. We analyze the challenge types
using DSG [11], which extracts challenge types from descriptions (e.g., Attribute-
color). This automatically generated by an LLM and thus may contain errors,
but it serves as an effective proxy for estimating the distribution of challenge
types. Table 2 summarizes the percentage of descriptions per challenge type and
the average number of challenge types per description. The descriptions include
an average of 17.7 objects,1 and their spatial relationships are mentioned in
1
    This number includes both primary and secondary objects. DSG often detects nested
    objects (e.g., tires of a car), leading to a higher count of objects detected.
8        Y. Onoe et al.

                 Table 3: Language complexity and readability scores.

       Dataset         Syntactic (↑) Semantic (↑) SMOG (↑) FRE (↓) #Errors (↓)
DOCCI (ours)               8.6           50.5         8.7       77.7       0.3
DCI (overall)              8.1           52.0         7.9       82.5       1.2
Stanford Vis. Par.         6.0           23.9         6.7       88.6       0.8
Localized Narratives       5.8           13.5         6.0       87.7       1.2
COCO                       4.5            4.9         7.3       82.2       0.1

99.9% of the descriptions. Object attributes are well covered: color and state are
described in 97% of descriptions. Additionally, count is present in 54.6% of the
descriptions, and text rendering in 23.3%. Each single description encompasses
multiple challenge types, making DOCCI a challenging benchmark.


3.3    Description Quality

Detail Are DOCCI descriptions detailed enough to differentiate similar/related
images? To answer this, we ask human annotators to identify the correct pivot
image from a set of four similar images (i.e., distractors), based on the pivot’s
description. For this, we sample 1k pivots images from the test set (DOCCI-
Test-Pivots). Then, we collect other images as distractor candidates from the
test set, based on their similarity scores and sample four as distractors, ensur-
ing that all images appear as a distractor for at least one pivot. This produces
1,000 groups of five images, and each is evaluated by three annotators. Given
the description and the five images (pivot and four distractors), three annotators
correctly identified the true (pivot) image 97.1% of the time, achieving Fleiss’
kappa of 0.98. We confirmed that all negative cases were due to human errors.
The high accuracy and strong agreement among annotators demonstrate that
the descriptions capture essential and unique details of the pivots.
Language Complexity Table 3 compares language complexity and readabil-
ity. For assessing language complexity, we evaluate two dimensions: the syntactic
complexity, measured by the maximum depth of the dependency tree [39], and
semantic complexity, indicated by the number of nodes in a scene graph. DOCCI
and DCI – the datasets with longer descriptions – generally achieve higher
complexity scores. DOCCI exhibits the highest syntactic complexity, while DCI
achieves the highest semantic complexity score. For readability scores, we report
the Simple Measure of Gobbledygook (SMOG) score [33] and the Flesch Read-
ing Ease (FRE) score [28]. The scores indicate that DOCCI’s descriptions are
generally written in plain English, yet are not overly simplistic. Additionally, we
count the average number of suggestions by an off-the-shelf spelling/grammar
checker. On average, DOCCI generates 0.3 error suggestions per description,
whereas DCI generates 1.2, indicating better quality control in DOCCI.2
2
    To ensure that DOCCI remains purely annotated by humans, we do not alter or
    modify descriptions based on suggested errors.
                   DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images                                                9

Image:                             DOCCI: Indoor downward angled shot of a toy DeLorean Hot Wheels car facing the right
                                   between two wooden child blocks with the red letters, "D" and "L" on their front faces
                                   with a red double lined border. The left block slightly angled towards the right with a
                                   blue number "3" on its left side and a yellow letter, "F" on the top. The rightmost block
                                   slightly angled towards the left with a faded yellow letter, "G" on its top. The three
                                   objects sit on a plain white surface. A light reflection is visible below the objects
                                   reflecting off of these semi-glossy surface. A bright light from the right side cast
                                   shadows backwards and slightly towards the left.

                                   GPT-4v: The image showcases a still life setup consisting of two wooden alphabet blocks
                                   and a small model car positioned between them. The blocks appear well-used, with some
                                   visible wear on their edges, adding a sense of nostalgia or history to the items. On the
                                   left, there is a block with a red letter 'D' prominently displayed against the block's
                                   natural beige color; similarly, the right block features a red letter 'L'. Between the
                                   two blocks, the model car, resembling a classic DeLorean, is positioned with its
                                   gull-wing doors opened, drawing attention to its metallic silver finish. The car's
                                   intricate details, including the rims and body panels, hint at its collectible nature.
                                   The lighting is soft and diffused, casting gentle shadows and giving the composition a
                                   calm, introspective mood. All items rest on a reflective white surface against a plain
                                   white background, which places the entire focus on the toys themselves.




Fig. 5: A side-by-side comparison of descriptions from DOCCI and one generated by
GPT-4v. Blue-highlighted spans indicate details present in one description but absent
in the other. Red-highlighted spans denote incorrect information (i.e., hallucination).

4        Evaluating I2T Generation Models with DOCCI
We demonstrate the utility of DOCCI for image-to-text (I2T) generation by
evaluating SOTA I2T models with both automatic metrics and side-by-side (SxS)
human evaluation. Additionally, we conduct a SxS human evaluation of DOCCI
descriptions compared to GPT-4v, to better understand key differences between
human descriptions and high-quality machine-generated descriptions.
Setup We generate detailed descriptions for images from the test set using
InstructBLIP (Vicuna-7B) [14], LLaVA-1.5 7B [37], and PaLI 5B [8,9]. Following
their original setup, we use a different prompt for each model as described in
their paper. PaLI has not been trained on captioning tasks during its pretraining
phase; thus, we finetune it using the DOCCI training set (9,647 examples) and
the COCO training set [36]. We report reference-based metrics for captioning
such as BLEU@4 [44], ROUGE-L [35], METEOR [5], CIDEr [60], and the average
number of words as proxies of the detail and density of descriptions.
SxS Human Evalution For SxS human evaluation, we focus on PaLI 5B
finetuned on DOCCI 3 compared to InstructBLIP, LLaVA, and GPT-4v, and
generate descriptions with each model for the 100 DOCCI-QUAL-TEST images.
Since GPT-4v generates lengthy descriptions, we prompted it to create shorter
descriptions.4 Even so, GPT-4v’s average response length was the longest, at 147
words. Annotators indicate their preference in terms of precision and recall
errors [27] (see Fig. 5). Here, precision primarily governs incorrect information
(i.e., hallucinations), and recall penalizes generic or uninformative descriptions.
We do not consider aspects of writing quality (e.g., fluency and word choice).
Quantitative Metrics Table 4 compares three I2T models on the qual-test
set, using common reference-based metrics. Pali 5B (finetuned on DOCCI) gen-
erates longer descriptions (121.8 words on average), substantially improving all
metrics and outperforming larger instruction-tuned models. This indicates that
the DOCCI training set is effective for fine-tuning and can drastically
 3
     We used a version of PaLI 5B, not trained on captioning tasks, as a base model.
 4
     “Generate a detailed image description with around 120 words, but you
     may adjust the length if you want.”
        10              Y. Onoe et al.

        Table 4: I2T performance on the DOCCI test set. PaLI 5B finetuned on DOCCI out-
        performs other models by a substantial margin, indicating that DOCCI is an effective
        training data for I2T generation.

          Model                                       Eval Mode BLEU@4 ROUGE-L METEOR CIDEr #Words
        PaLI 5B, FT on COCO                            finetune        0.0             11.3              3.6            0.0           15.1
        PaLI 5B, FT on DOCCI                           finetune       10.1             29.1             17.9           16.0          121.8
        InstructBLIP (Vicuna-7B)                      zero-shot        3.5             20.5             10.6            5.9           84.4
        LLaVA-1.5 7B                                  zero-shot        3.5             22.0             11.3            6.4           89.5
                                      PaLI 5B FT on DOCCI vs GPT-4v




                                PaLI 5B FT on DOCCI vs LLaVA-1.5 7B




                                PaLI 5B FT on DOCCI vs InstructBLIP




        Fig. 6: Side-by-side human evaluation of descriptions generated by PaLI, GPT-4v,
        LLaVA, and InstructBLIP, with a specific focus on the visual features listed in Sec-
        tion 2.2. Note that we do not assess writing quality (fluency and word choice). In
        summary, descriptions by finetuned PaLI 5B contain more details compared to those
        three models (better recall scores), but it falls behind GPT-4v in terms of precision.

        change the output length despite its relatively small size. Note that
        we use only one reference description per image, and the choice of reference de-
        scription impacts those scores [17]. Additionally, we still lack reliable automatic
              Input
        metrics                   GPT-4v and long
                 for evaluating detailed         LLaVA         InstructBLIP
                                                   image descriptions.                 PaLIdo
                                                                          Given this, we
        not assess the content of the generated descriptions, leaving it for future research.
                                                                                                                                  Close-up view of a gra
                                                                                   The image features a small gray and
           Human Evaluation Results Figure 6 plots                                          whitethe    Likerton scale
                                                                                                   cat sitting              for eachtabby
                                                                                                                   the floor,
                                                                                            drinking water from a bowl. The cat
                                                                                                                                       model
                                                                                                                                      water
                                                                                                                                             kitten drinking
                                                                                                                                             out of a glass
                                                                                                                                      bowl, indoors. The
           pair. The top bar plot shows that GPT-4v isis                                     more      accurate
                                                                                                positioned           than
                                                                                                            in the center  of PaLI
                                                                                                                              the
                                                                                            scene, with the bowl placed in front
                                                                                                                                     5B   fine-
                                                                                                                                      kitten  is facing
                                                                                                                                      forward with its head
           tuned on DOCCI, but PaLIIn theincludes                                    more
                                                                     image, a gray and
                                                                                           details.
                                                                                            of it. The GPT-4v
                                                                                                        cat's head istypically
                                                                                                                        partially
                                                                                            submerged in the water, as it enjoys
                                                                                                                                    produces
                                                                                                                                      bent down   and its
                                                              white striped cat is                                                    tongue out, it has
           fluent and accurate descriptions,                               though
                                                              drinking water from a
                                                                                        they are
                                                                                            its     not
                                                                                                 drink.   always      concise,     sometimes
                                                                                                                                      olive  green  eyes and
                                                              clear glass bowl placed                                                 white whiskers. The
The photo     captures a youngspeculative
           including              tabby cat with a sleek statements.         Conversely,
                                                              on a wooden floor. The
                                                                                            ThePaLI     provides
                                                                                                 room has             more
                                                                                                           a potted plant       details
                                                                                                                           located
                                                                                            in the background, and a window can
                                                                                                                                         (e.g.,
                                                                                                                                      glass  bowl  is over a
gray coat speckled with darker gray markings. Its             cat is positioned near                                                  light-brown hardwood
attentivespatial
            eyes gaze softlyrelationships,
                               through the transparent namedthentities),
                                                                   edge of the bowl,
                                                                                    but thisbecomes     at
                                                                                                seen in the  the
                                                                                                             upper risk
                                                                                                                   part ofof  generating
                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                                                      floor, in-
                                                                                                                                              with a white
glass of a water bowl from which it's drinking. The                                         image. The scene captures the cat's
                                                              with its head close to                                                  wall in the background
cat's pinkaccurate              information.
             tongue daintily touches   the water         The middle          plot indicates
                                                              the surface of the water.
                                                                                                  thatandhuman
                                                                                            curiosity       enjoyment annotators
                                                                                                                       of its water   slightly
                                                                                                                                      and a green plant to
surface. A soft natural light illuminates the scene,                                        source.
                                                              A potted plant can be                                                   the left behind the
           prefer
highlighting    the feline'sPaLI
                             keenness over        LLaVA on
                                       and the texture              both precision and recall, while the bottom
                                                              seen in the background,                                                 cat. plot
of its fur. In the background, the blurred shapes of          adding a natural touch
           suggests
green houseplant               that
                       leaves and  a creamPaLI        is preferred
                                            wall with a                  over InstructBLIP. Note that LLaVA has been
                                                              to the scene.
shadow cast by the window frame create a cozy,
domestictrained
             atmosphere. The  oncat'sthe     instruction
                                      pose and  the            tuning data generated (158k) by GPT-4 [40], and
proximity to the water suggest a moment of quiet
respite, as the pet enjoys a simple daily ritual in
the tranquility of its home environment.
                       DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images                                   11

                                                                                      DOCCI is substantially better
Precision              16% 16%              59%          8%                           DOCCI is marginally better
                                                                                      Neutral
    Recall           66%              23%                                             GPT-4v is marginally better
                                                                                      GPT-4v is substantially better
         90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
                                Percentage of Responses

Fig. 7: Side-by-side human evaluation of the DOCCI descriptions and those generated
by GPT-4v, with a specific focus on the visual features listed in Section 2.2. Note that
we do not assess the quality of the writing such as fluency and word choice.
InstructBLIP has been trained on a range of vision-language datasets adapted
for instruction tuning (13 publicly available datasets). Despite the fact that
the DOCCI training set is relatively small (9.6k), the finetuned PaLI
achieves remarkable performance, demonstrating the strong supervi-
sion in the DOCCI training set and the sample efficiency of PaLI 5B.
DOCCI Descriptions vs GPT-4v GPT-4v [41] demonstrates impressive
abilities in generating fluent, well-written descriptions. However, can GPT-4v
create more detailed descriptions than those of human annotators? We generate
descriptions of similar length to those in the DOCCI using images from DOCCI-
QUAL-TEST. Figure 7 plots the 5-point Likert scale for precision and recall
selected by annotators. For precision, as both DOCCI and GPT-4v descriptions
rarely include incorrect information, the annotators selected “Neutral” 59% of
the time. Other than “Neutral”, annotators judge DOCCI descriptions as more
accurate than those of GPT-4v. The annotators prefer DOCCI descriptions 89%
of the time in terms of recall. Figure 5 showcases the details present in one de-
scription but absent in the other (blue-highlighted spans) and inaccurate infor-
mation (red-highlighted spans). Although DOCCI descriptions are shorter, they
include more detailed information compared to GPT-4v descriptions. These
findings show that large models like GPT-4v demonstrate remarkable
capabilities in producing detailed descriptions, but that there are still
important gaps with descriptions created by human annotators.
5      Evaluating T2I Generation Models with DOCCI
Here, we report the performance of current high-performing T2I models on
DOCCI. For this, we compute automatic metrics for image quality and text-
image alignment, along with side-by-side (SxS) human evaluation.
Setup We generate images based on DOCCI descriptions using three T2I
models: a variant of Imagen [51], DALL-E 3 [42], and Stable Diffusion XL
(SDXL) [45]. We report on three image quality metrics: FID [22], CMMD [25],
and FDDINOv2 [56], and two text-image-alignment metrics, CLIPScore [21] and
DSG [11] on the test set.5 For FID, CMMD, and FDDINOv2 ,6 we use DOCCI
5
  We used 4,966 examples as DALL-E 3’s content filter rejected 34 rewritten prompts
  (Our descriptions do not contain any sensitive content.).
6
  We used the public implementation of FID: https://github.com/mseitzer/
  pytorch - fid, CMMD: https : / / github . com / sayakpaul / cmmd - pytorch, and
  FDDINOv2 : https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/dgm-eval.
12      Y. Onoe et al.

Table 5: T2I performance by Imagen, SDXL, and DALL-E 3 on the DOCCI test set.
For image quality metrics, we report random training images (Random) and retrieved
training images based on descriptions (Text Ret.) as baselines. For image-text align-
ment metrics, we report scores using with the original images as an oracle (Test).

                     Image Quality                        Image-Text Alignment
Model       FID (↓) CMMD (↓) FDDINOv2 (↓)      CLIPScore (↑) DSGVQA (↑) DSGHuman (↑)

Imagen       28.13       1.016       300.8         81.2           69.2           77.3
SDXL         23.69       0.823       267.2         85.9           65.2           69.8
DALL-E 3     32.37       1.691       300.8         80.1           76.3           85.6
Random       13.71       0.002       142.8          –              –              –
Text Ret.    13.43       0.003       133.1          –              –              –
Test           –           –           –           80.8           78.7           91.7


images to compute the statistics of the reference distribution. We also report
random training images (Random) and retrieved training images based on de-
scriptions (Text Ret.) as baselines. For DSG, we compute the final score using
a VQA model (DSGVQA ), with PaLM 2 340B [3] for question generation and
PaLI 17B [9] for VQA. In addition, we ask human annotators to assess 100 sam-
ples from the test set to observe the correlation between the scores given by
the VQA model and human judgment (DSGHuman ). As oracle performance, we
report the scores computed with the original test images (Test). Additionally,
we conduct side-by-side human evaluation using the 100 DOCCI-QUAL-TEST
set, focusing on user preference. In this human evaluation, we ask annotators
to rank three generated images based on the same description, considering both
image quality and fit to the prompt, and report the mean rank of each model.
Automatic Metrics and User Preference Table 5 shows the zero-shot T2I
generation performance of the models with automatic metrics. All three models
substantially underperform the Random and Text Ret. baselines, and SDXL
consistently achieves better scores than Imagen and DALL-E 3 (for FID, CMMD,
and FDDINOv2 ). These results run counter to our human evaluation, which rate
DALL-E 3 and Imagen higher: In our user preference evaluation, DALL-
E 3 was rated the highest with a mean rank of 1.42, followed by
Imagen at 1.84 and SDXL at 2.38. This discrepancy between FID and
human judgment is also reported in previous studies [43, 56].
Image-Text Alignment The right half of Table 5 lists three metrics for
image-text alignment. SDXL achieves the highest CLIPScore, while DALL-E
3 performs the worst. However, DSGVQA results in a conflicting pattern which
aligns better with our human evaluation. Basically, CLIPScore is not suitable
for long descriptions as the CLIP text encoder truncates just 77 tokens. While
one can summarize a long description to fit this input limit, there will still be
information loss. In contrast, DSG extracts atomic validation questions from
the full description, distilling its full specification in a detailed and interpretable
manner. It thus serves as a better proxy for image-text alignment. We addition-
ally report the DSG results by human annotators instead of a VQA model to
verify its reliability (DSGHuman ). The absolute scores are higher than DSGVQA
                                                      DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images     13

 High Similarity
                                      Description             Original         Imagen      DALL-E 3        SDXL

                                     A long-shot view of
                                    the front side of the
                                    Hoover Dam. The dam is
                                    very large, and it is
                                    made up of light brown
                                      stone. The bottom
                                       portion of it is
                                    narrow, but as it goes
                                      up, it gets wider.
                                    Underneath the bottom…
Low Similarity Mixed Similarities




                                    A blue Ford truck with
                                     a black grille guard
                                     attached to the front
                                    of it is parked on the
                                      side of a dark gray
                                    asphalt road. Directly
                                      to the left of the
                                     truck is a grass area
                                      with a gray cement
                                        sidewalk on it…

                                     A red cardboard sign
                                     with white text and a
                                    white border. The text
                                       on the sign reads
                                         "COMING SOON /
                                     PROXIMAMENTE". There
                                     are creases where the
                                    cardboard has been bent
                                    at the top of the sign
                                      and in the bottom..



Fig. 8: Text-to-Image Reconstruction Quality. Top row (a) shows high-fidelity recon-
structions by Imagen, DALL-E 3, and SDXL with CLIP similarities over 88%, due to
detailed descriptions. Middle row (b) DALL-E 3 generates an image of a box truck
instead of an open truck, viewed from an aerial perspective, and includes additional,
unintended road signs. Bottom row (c) depicts all models’ overemphasis of “green” from
a vague description, highlighting the impact of inadequate detail in the input.

as human annotators can make better judgments in areas where VQA models
fall short (e.g., spatial relations). The overall trend of DSGHuman matches with
DSGVQA as well as our user preference evaluation. DALL-E 3 tops the DSG
scores likely due to the low truncation-caused information loss with
its context length of 4k characters, in contrast to Imagen’s 128 tokens
and SDXL’s 77 tokens. We provide detailed error analysis in Appendix E.

Text-to-Image Reconstruction The detailed descriptions in the DOCCI
dataset enable a benchmarking of text-to-image models’ ability to recreate origi-
nal images (meaning: compare a generated image to a reference image). This is an
analysis not possible with prompt-only evaluation sets such as Parti Prompts [65]
or Drawbench [52]. We utilize 5,000 test descriptions from the dataset to gen-
erate images using Imagen, DALL-E 3, and SDXL. The fidelity of these re-
constructions to the original images is quantified using two metrics: CLIP (ViT-
L/14@336px) [47] (image-to-image) and DreamSim [18], a newer metric designed
to assess the resemblance of generated images to a reference. The resulting CLIP
similarity scores—85.1 for SDXL, 82.8 for DALL-E 3, and 85.8 for Imagen and
DreamSim scores—53.7, 54.1, and 51.6, respectively—while suggesting models
perform comparably at a high level, conceal nuanced deficits in their under-
standing and recreation of complex imagery. Clearly, more work is needed on
automatic metrics with respect to the level of detail given in DOCCI.
14     Y. Onoe et al.

    In-depth analysis reveals further insights, exemplified in Figure 8: (a) High
similarity instances, depicted in the top row, where all models achieve close
resemblance to the original images, typically occur with comprehensive descrip-
tions. (b) The middle row showcases mixed similarity scenarios, highlighting
certain models’ superiority over others and exposing their relative strengths and
weaknesses. (c) The bottom row presents cases of low similarity, where the gener-
ative models struggle due to underspecified visual features [24]. These perfor-
mance variations pinpoint the current models’ limitations and estab-
lish DOCCI as useful means to identify the strengths and weaknesses
in visual reconstruction by these models.


6    Related Work
Over the past decade, the vision-language research community has developed
various image-text datasets. In the early years, datasets such as Flickr30k [63],
COCO [10, 36], and Visual Genome [32] provided annotations in the form of
human-written captions for images depicting common objects from everyday
scenes. Since then, captioning datasets have been evolving, for example, no-
caps [2] annotated captions to more diverse objects [30], Localized Narratives [46]
used more modalities (e.g., mouse tracking) for annotation, Stanford Visual
Paragraphs [31] annotated dense and descriptive captions, and WIT [55] and
Crossmodal 3600 [57] considered multilinguality. Another line of research fo-
cuses on scale, building much larger image-text pair datasets. YFCC100M [58]
includes 100M images/videos that have been collected from the web. Conceptual
Captions [7,54] collected up to 12M images together with alt-text. RedCaps [15]
provides 12M image text pairs collected from Reddit. WIT [55] is large scale
as well as multilingual, providing 11.5M images with text in 108 languages.
CLIP [47] and ALIGN [26] have been trained on large-scale web datasets con-
taining 400M and 1.8B image alt-text pairs respectively. This trend continues
further: LAION-5B [53] extended its size to 5B and WebLI [9] consists of 10B
image-text pairs from 109 languages.
    DOCCI primarily focuses on the density and quality of descriptions and is
directly comparable with prior work such as Stanford Visual Paragraphs [31] and
DCI [59], which have a similar balance of size and density. DAC [16] improves the
quality of descriptions using an LLM and achieves higher performance on down-
stream tasks. However, our human evaluation results (Section 4) indicate that
human annotations still have an advantage over (proprietary) machine gener-
ated/elaborated dense descriptions in terms of detail and lack of hallucinations.


7    Conclusion
In this work, we introduced Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting
Images (DOCCI), a new vision-language dataset that consists of 15k newly
curated images with detailed descriptions annotated by humans. Using DOCCI,
we showcased outstanding problems in T2I models and evaluation such as their
                 DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images            15

limited input length and the unreliability of automatic metrics. We encourage
the research community to develop improved model architectures and evaluation
metrics that are better suited for detailed visual descriptions in future work.


8   Acknowledgement
First of all, we would like to express our gratitude to all members of the annotator
team for their diligent and hard work on a very challenging and long-running
task. We also give a huge thanks to Soravit Changpinyo and Radu Soricut for
their thorough review and the constructive feedback provided on our paper.
Many thanks also to Cristina Vasconcelos and Brian Gordon for their support
with our experiments, and to Andrea Burns for insightful suggestions for the
paper. Finally, Jason Baldridge is incredibly grateful to his family members who
contributed by helping arrange scenes, taking pictures, and being patient while
he took so many pictures – Cheryl, Olivia, Nash, Gray, and Esme Baldridge and
Mary and Justin Reusch – and to pets Ivy, Tiger, DD and Yoshi for their roles
as frequent subjects.


References
 1. Adobe: Adobe Firefly (2023) 1
 2. Agrawal, H., Desai, K., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Jain, R., Johnson, M., Batra, D.,
    Parikh, D., Lee, S., Anderson, P.: nocaps: novel object captioning at scale. In:
    ICCV (2019) 14
 3. Anil, R., Dai, A.M., Firat, O., Johnson, M., Lepikhin, D., Passos, A., Shakeri, S.,
    Taropa, E., Bailey, P., Chen, Z., et al.: Palm 2 technical report. arXiv (2023) 12
 4. Bakr, E.M., Sun, P., Shen, X., Khan, F.F., Li, L.E., Elhoseiny, M.: Hrs-bench:
    Holistic, reliable and scalable benchmark for text-to-image models. In: ICCV (2023)
    1
 5. Banerjee, S., Lavie, A.: METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with
    Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. In: ACL Workshop on Intrinsic
    and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization
    (2005) 9
 6. Chang, H., Zhang, H., Barber, J., Maschinot, A., Lezama, J., Jiang, L., Yang,
    M.H., Murphy, K.P., Freeman, W.T., Rubinstein, M., Li, Y., Krishnan, D.: Muse:
    Text-To-Image Generation via Masked Generative Transformers. In: ICML (2023)
    1
 7. Changpinyo, S., Sharma, P., Ding, N., Soricut, R.: Conceptual 12m: Pushing web-
    scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In: CVPR
    (2021) 14
 8. Chen, X., Wang, X., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Wu, J., Voigtlaender, P., Mustafa,
    B., Goodman, S., Alabdulmohsin, I., Padlewski, P., Salz, D., Xiong, X., Vlasic, D.,
    Pavetic, F., Rong, K., Yu, T., Keysers, D., Zhai, X., Soricut, R.: PaLI-3 Vision
    Language Models: Smaller, Faster, Stronger (2023) 9
 9. Chen, X., Wang, X., Changpinyo, S., Piergiovanni, A., Padlewski, P., Salz, D.,
    Goodman, S., Grycner, A., Mustafa, B., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Puigcerver, J.,
    Ding, N., Rong, K., Akbari, H., Mishra, G., Xue, L., Thapliyal, A.V., Bradbury,
16      Y. Onoe et al.

    J., Kuo, W., Seyedhosseini, M., Jia, C., Ayan, B.K., Ruiz, C.R., Steiner, A.P., An-
    gelova, A., Zhai, X., Houlsby, N., Soricut, R.: PaLI: A Jointly-Scaled Multilingual
    Language-Image Model. In: ICLR (2023) 9, 12, 14
10. Chen, X., Fang, H., Lin, T.Y., Vedantam, R., Gupta, S., Dollár, P., Zitnick, C.L.:
    Microsoft COCO Captions: Data Collection and Evaluation Server. ArXiv (2015)
    14
11. Cho, J., Hu, Y., Baldridge, J.M., Garg, R., Anderson, P., Krishna, R., Bansal,
    M., Pont-Tuset, J., Wang, S.: Davidsonian Scene Graph: Improving Reliability in
    Fine-grained Evaluation for Text-Image Generation. In: ICLR (2024) 1, 2, 7, 11
12. Cho, J., Zala, A., Bansal, M.: DALL-Eval: Probing the Reasoning Skills and Social
    Biases of Text-to-Image Generation Models. In: ICCV (2023) 1
13. Conwell, C., Ullman, T.D.: Testing Relational Understanding in Text-Guided Im-
    age Generation. ArXiv (2022) 1
14. Dai, W., Li, J., Li, D., Tiong, A.M.H., Zhao, J., Wang, W., Li, B., Fung, P., Hoi, S.:
    InstructBLIP: Towards General-purpose Vision-Language Models with Instruction
    Tuning. In: NeurIPS (2023) 9
15. Desai, K., Kaul, G., Aysola, Z.T., Johnson, J.: RedCaps: Web-curated image-text
    data created by the people, for the people. In: NeurIPS: Datasets and Benchmarks
    Track (2021) 14
16. Doveh, S., Arbelle, A., Harary, S., Herzig, R., Kim, D., Cascante-Bonilla, P., Al-
    fassy, A., Panda, R., Giryes, R., Feris, R., Ullman, S., Karlinsky, L.: Dense and
    Aligned Captions (DAC) Promote Compositional Reasoning in VL Models. In:
    NeurIPS (2023) 14
17. Freitag, M., Grangier, D., Caswell, I.: BLEU might be Guilty but References are
    not Innocent. In: Webber, B., Cohn, T., He, Y., Liu, Y. (eds.) EMNLP (2020) 10
18. Fu*, S., Tamir*, N., Sundaram*, S., Chai, L., Zhang, R., Dekel, T., Isola, P.:
    DreamSim: Learning New Dimensions of Human Visual Similarity using Synthetic
    Data. arXiv (2023) 13
19. Gardner, M., Artzi, Y., Basmov, V., Berant, J., Bogin, B., Chen, S., Dasigi, P.,
    Dua, D., Elazar, Y., Gottumukkala, A., Gupta, N., Hajishirzi, H., Ilharco, G.,
    Khashabi, D., Lin, K., Liu, J., Liu, N.F., Mulcaire, P., Ning, Q., Singh, S., Smith,
    N.A., Subramanian, S., Tsarfaty, R., Wallace, E., Zhang, A., Zhou, B.: Evaluating
    Models’ Local Decision Boundaries via Contrast Sets. In: Cohn, T., He, Y., Liu,
    Y. (eds.) Findings of EMNLP (2020) 3
20. Gebru, T., Morgenstern, J., Vecchione, B., Vaughan, J.W., Wallach, H., au2,
    H.D.I., Crawford, K.: Datasheets for Datasets (2021) 29
21. Hessel, J., Holtzman, A., Forbes, M., Le Bras, R., Choi, Y.: CLIPScore: A
    Reference-free Evaluation Metric for Image Captioning (2021) 2, 4, 11
22. Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., Hochreiter, S.: GANs
    Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilib-
    rium (2018) 4, 11
23. Hu, Y., Liu, B., Kasai, J., Wang, Y., Ostendorf, M., Krishna, R., Smith, N.A.:
    TIFA: Accurate and Interpretable Text-to-Image Faithfulness Evaluation with
    Question Answering. In: CVPR (2023) 2
24. Hutchinson, B., Baldridge, J., Prabhakaran, V.: Underspecification in Scene
    Description-to-Depiction Tasks (2022) 14
25. Jayasumana, S., Ramalingam, S., Veit, A., Glasner, D., Chakrabarti, A., Kumar,
    S.: Rethinking FID: Towards a Better Evaluation Metric for Image Generation
    (2024) 11
                  DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images               17

26. Jia, C., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Chen, Y.T., Parekh, Z., Pham, H., Le, Q.V., Sung, Y.,
    Li, Z., Duerig, T.: Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
    with noisy text supervision. In: ICML (2021) 14
27. Kasai, J., Sakaguchi, K., Dunagan, L., Morrison, J., Le Bras, R., Choi, Y., Smith,
    N.A.: Transparent Human Evaluation for Image Captioning. In: NAACL (2022) 9
28. Kincaid, P., Fishburne, R.P., Rogers, R.L., Chissom, B.S.: Derivation of New Read-
    ability Formulas (Automated Readability Index, Fog Count and Flesch Reading
    Ease Formula) for Navy Enlisted Personnel (1975) 8
29. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T.,
    Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Segment Anything.
    arXiv (2023) 2
30. Krasin, I., Duerig, T., Alldrin, N., Veit, A., Abu-El-Haija, S., Belongie, S., Cai, D.,
    Feng, Z., Ferrari, V., Gomes, V., Gupta, A., Narayanan, D., Sun, C., Chechik, G.,
    Murphy, K.: OpenImages: A public dataset for large-scale multi-label and multi-
    class image classification. Dataset available from https://github.com/openimages
    (2016) 14
31. Krause, J., Johnson, J., Krishna, R., Fei-Fei, L.: A Hierarchical Approach for Gen-
    erating Descriptive Image Paragraphs. In: CVPR (2017) 6, 14
32. Krishna, R., Zhu, Y., Groth, O., Johnson, J., Hata, K., Kravitz, J., Chen, S.,
    Kalantidis, Y., Li, L.J., Shamma, D.A., et al.: Visual genome: Connecting language
    and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. IJCV (2017) 14
33. Laughlin, G.H.M.: SMOG Grading-a New Readability Formula. Journal of Reading
    (1969) 8
34. Lee, T., Yasunaga, M., Meng, C., Mai, Y., Park, J.S., Gupta, A., Zhang, Y.,
    Narayanan, D., Teufel, H.B., Bellagente, M., Kang, M., Park, T., Leskovec, J.,
    Zhu, J.Y., Fei-Fei, L., Wu, J., Ermon, S., Liang, P.: Holistic Evaluation of Text-
    To-Image Models (2023) 1
35. Lin, C.Y.: ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In: Text
    Summarization Branches Out (2004) 9
36. Lin, T.Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S.J., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Dollár, P.,
    Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In: ECCV (2014) 2,
    6, 9, 14
37. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual Instruction Tuning. In: NeurIPS (2023)
    9
38. Midjourney: Midjourney (2022) 1
39. Ohta S, Fukui N, S.K.: Computational principles of syntax in the regions specialized
    for language: integrating theoretical linguistics and functional neuroimaging (2013)
    8
40. OpenAI, :, Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L.,
    Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., Avila, R., Babuschkin, I.,
    Balaji, S., Balcom, V., Baltescu, P., Bao, H., Bavarian, M., Belgum, J., Bello, I.,
    Berdine, J., Bernadett-Shapiro, G., Berner, C., Bogdonoff, L., Boiko, O., Boyd,
    M., Brakman, A.L., Brockman, G., Brooks, T., Brundage, M., Button, K., Cai, T.,
    Campbell, R., Cann, A., Carey, B., Carlson, C., Carmichael, R., Chan, B., Chang,
    C., Chantzis, F., Chen, D., Chen, S., Chen, R., Chen, J., Chen, M., Chess, B.,
    Cho, C., Chu, C., Chung, H.W., Cummings, D., Currier, J., Dai, Y., Decareaux,
    C., Degry, T., Deutsch, N., Deville, D., Dhar, A., Dohan, D., Dowling, S., Dunning,
    S., Ecoffet, A., Eleti, A., Eloundou, T., Farhi, D., Fedus, L., Felix, N., Fishman,
    S.P., Forte, J., Fulford, I., Gao, L., Georges, E., Gibson, C., Goel, V., Gogineni,
    T., Goh, G., Gontijo-Lopes, R., Gordon, J., Grafstein, M., Gray, S., Greene, R.,
18      Y. Onoe et al.

    Gross, J., Gu, S.S., Guo, Y., Hallacy, C., Han, J., Harris, J., He, Y., Heaton, M.,
    Heidecke, J., Hesse, C., Hickey, A., Hickey, W., Hoeschele, P., Houghton, B., Hsu,
    K., Hu, S., Hu, X., Huizinga, J., Jain, S., Jain, S., Jang, J., Jiang, A., Jiang, R.,
    Jin, H., Jin, D., Jomoto, S., Jonn, B., Jun, H., Kaftan, T., Łukasz Kaiser, Kamali,
    A., Kanitscheider, I., Keskar, N.S., Khan, T., Kilpatrick, L., Kim, J.W., Kim, C.,
    Kim, Y., Kirchner, J.H., Kiros, J., Knight, M., Kokotajlo, D., Łukasz Kondraciuk,
    Kondrich, A., Konstantinidis, A., Kosic, K., Krueger, G., Kuo, V., Lampe, M., Lan,
    I., Lee, T., Leike, J., Leung, J., Levy, D., Li, C.M., Lim, R., Lin, M., Lin, S., Litwin,
    M., Lopez, T., Lowe, R., Lue, P., Makanju, A., Malfacini, K., Manning, S., Markov,
    T., Markovski, Y., Martin, B., Mayer, K., Mayne, A., McGrew, B., McKinney, S.M.,
    McLeavey, C., McMillan, P., McNeil, J., Medina, D., Mehta, A., Menick, J., Metz,
    L., Mishchenko, A., Mishkin, P., Monaco, V., Morikawa, E., Mossing, D., Mu, T.,
    Murati, M., Murk, O., Mély, D., Nair, A., Nakano, R., Nayak, R., Neelakantan, A.,
    Ngo, R., Noh, H., Ouyang, L., O’Keefe, C., Pachocki, J., Paino, A., Palermo, J.,
    Pantuliano, A., Parascandolo, G., Parish, J., Parparita, E., Passos, A., Pavlov, M.,
    Peng, A., Perelman, A., de Avila Belbute Peres, F., Petrov, M., de Oliveira Pinto,
    H.P., Michael, Pokorny, Pokrass, M., Pong, V.H., Powell, T., Power, A., Power,
    B., Proehl, E., Puri, R., Radford, A., Rae, J., Ramesh, A., Raymond, C., Real,
    F., Rimbach, K., Ross, C., Rotsted, B., Roussez, H., Ryder, N., Saltarelli, M.,
    Sanders, T., Santurkar, S., Sastry, G., Schmidt, H., Schnurr, D., Schulman, J.,
    Selsam, D., Sheppard, K., Sherbakov, T., Shieh, J., Shoker, S., Shyam, P., Sidor,
    S., Sigler, E., Simens, M., Sitkin, J., Slama, K., Sohl, I., Sokolowsky, B., Song,
    Y., Staudacher, N., Such, F.P., Summers, N., Sutskever, I., Tang, J., Tezak, N.,
    Thompson, M.B., Tillet, P., Tootoonchian, A., Tseng, E., Tuggle, P., Turley, N.,
    Tworek, J., Uribe, J.F.C., Vallone, A., Vijayvergiya, A., Voss, C., Wainwright, C.,
    Wang, J.J., Wang, A., Wang, B., Ward, J., Wei, J., Weinmann, C., Welihinda, A.,
    Welinder, P., Weng, J., Weng, L., Wiethoff, M., Willner, D., Winter, C., Wolrich,
    S., Wong, H., Workman, L., Wu, S., Wu, J., Wu, M., Xiao, K., Xu, T., Yoo, S., Yu,
    K., Yuan, Q., Zaremba, W., Zellers, R., Zhang, C., Zhang, M., Zhao, S., Zheng,
    T., Zhuang, J., Zhuk, W., Zoph, B.: GPT-4 Technical Report (2024) 10
41. OpenAI: GPT-4V(ision) system card (2022) 11
42. OpenAI: DALL·E 3 system card (2023) 1, 11
43. Otani, M., Togashi, R., Sawai, Y., Ishigami, R., Nakashima, Y., Rahtu, E., Heikkilä,
    J., Satoh, S.: Toward Verifiable and Reproducible Human Evaluation for Text-to-
    Image Generation. In: CVPR (2023) 12
44. Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.J.: Bleu: a Method for Automatic
    Evaluation of Machine Translation. In: ACL (2002) 9
45. Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Müller, J., Penna,
    J., Rombach, R.: SDXL: Improving Latent Diffusion Models for High-Resolution
    Image Synthesis. In: ICLR (2024) 11
46. Pont-Tuset, J., Uijlings, J., Changpinyo, S., Soricut, R., Ferrari, V.: Connecting
    Vision and Language with Localized Narratives. In: ECCV (2020) 6, 14
47. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G.,
    Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from
    natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp.
    8748–8763. PMLR (2021) 13, 14
48. Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., Chen, M.: Hierarchical Text-
    Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents (2022) 1
49. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-Resolution
    Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In: CVPR (2022) 1
                  DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images               19

50. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., Aberman, K.: Dream-
    booth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation.
    In: CVPR (2023) 5, 22
51. Saharia, C., Chan, W., Saxena, S., Li, L., Whang, J., Denton, E.L., Ghasemipour,
    K., Gontijo Lopes, R., Karagol Ayan, B., Salimans, T., Ho, J., Fleet, D.J., Norouzi,
    M.: Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with Deep Language Under-
    standing. In: NeurIPS (2022) 1, 11
52. Saharia, C., Chan, W., Saxena, S., Li, L., Whang, J., Denton, E.L., Ghasemipour,
    K., Gontijo Lopes, R., Karagol Ayan, B., Salimans, T., et al.: Photorealistic text-
    to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural
    Information Processing Systems 35, 36479–36494 (2022) 13
53. Schuhmann, C., Beaumont, R., Vencu, R., Gordon, C.W., Wightman, R., Cherti,
    M., Coombes, T., Katta, A., Mullis, C., Wortsman, M., Schramowski, P., Kun-
    durthy, S.R., Crowson, K., Schmidt, L., Kaczmarczyk, R., Jitsev, J.: LAION-5B:
    An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In:
    NeurIPS: Datasets and Benchmarks Track 14
54. Sharma, P., Ding, N., Goodman, S., Soricut, R.: Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
    hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In: ACL
    (2018) 14
55. Srinivasan, K., Raman, K., Chen, J., Bendersky, M., Najork, M.: WIT: Wikipedia-
    Based Image Text Dataset for Multimodal Multilingual Machine Learning. In:
    SIGIR (2021) 14
56. Stein, G., Cresswell, J., Hosseinzadeh, R., Sui, Y., Ross, B., Villecroze, V., Liu, Z.,
    Caterini, A.L., Taylor, E., Loaiza-Ganem, G.: Exposing flaws of generative model
    evaluation metrics and their unfair treatment of diffusion models. In: NeurIPS
    (2023) 11, 12
57. Thapliyal, A., Pont-Tuset, J., Chen, X., Soricut, R.: Crossmodal-3600: A Massively
    Multilingual Multimodal Evaluation Dataset. In: EMNLP (2022) 14
58. Thomee, B., Shamma, D.A., Friedland, G., Elizalde, B., Ni, K., Poland, D., Borth,
    D., Li, L.J.: YFCC100M: the new data in multimedia research. Commun. ACM
    (2016) 14
59. Urbanek, J., Bordes, F., Astolfi, P., Williamson, M., Sharma, V., Romero-Soriano,
    A.: A Picture is Worth More Than 77 Text Tokens: Evaluating CLIP-Style Models
    on Dense Captions (2023) 2, 6, 14
60. Vedantam, R., Zitnick, C.L., Parikh, D.: Cider: Consensus-based image description
    evaluation. In: CVPR (2015) 9
61. Wang, S., Saharia, C., Montgomery, C., Pont-Tuset, J., Noy, S., Pellegrini, S., Onoe,
    Y., Laszlo, S., Fleet, D.J., Soricut, R., Baldridge, J., Norouzi, M., Anderson, P.,
    Chan, W.: Imagen Editor and EditBench: Advancing and Evaluating Text-Guided
    Image Inpainting. In: CVPR (2023) 1
62. Yarom, M., Bitton, Y., Changpinyo, S., Aharoni, R., Herzig, J., Lang, O., Ofek, E.,
    Szpektor, I.: What You See is What You Read? Improving Text-Image Alignment
    Evaluation. In: NeurIPS (2023) 2, 25
63. Young, P., Lai, A., Hodosh, M., Hockenmaier, J.: From image descriptions to visual
    denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions.
    TACL (2014) 14
64. Yu, J., Xu, Y., Koh, J.Y., Luong, T., Baid, G., Wang, Z., Vasudevan, V., Ku, A.,
    Yang, Y., Ayan, B.K., Hutchinson, B., Han, W., Parekh, Z., Li, X., Zhang, H.,
    Baldridge, J., Wu, Y.: Scaling Autoregressive Models for Content-Rich Text-to-
    Image Generation (2022) 1, 21, 28
20      Y. Onoe et al.

65. Yu, J., Xu, Y., Koh, J.Y., Luong, T., Baid, G., Wang, Z., Vasudevan, V., Ku,
    A., Yang, Y., Ayan, B.K., et al.: Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich
    text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789 2(3), 5 (2022) 13
                DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images        21

Appendix

In this appendix, we present Image Collection and Curation (Appendix A), Key
Visual Features of DOCCI (Appendix B), Annotation Details of DOCCI (Ap-
pendix C), Object Statistics in DOCCI Images (Appendix D), Error Analysis
for Text-to-Image Generation models (Appendix E), and Datasheet for DOCCI
(Appendix F).


A    Image Collection and Curation

Section 2.1 gives an overview of the motivations, time periods and locations of
many of the photographs. Here, Jason Baldridge gives additional detail (in first
person) about further background, motivations and choices regarding DOCCI
image collection and curation.

Collection. While writing up the Parti paper [64], I put a lot of time and thought
into conveying both the process of coming up with great images (growing cherry
trees, section 6.2) and the limitations and failure modes of the model (section
6.3). This was before the time of broadly available text-to-image models and
I felt this was essential to making sure that a broader view of the model was
available than if we only included our favorite cherry picked outputs in the paper
and elsewhere. Even though Parti came out in June 2022, we had early exciting
models that I had been working with in summer 2021, and I was already obsessed
with exploring the boundaries of what they could and could not do.
     My son Nash plays competitive junior tennis, and there was a rain delay
during one of his matches in August 2021. I was looking at the tennis court,
which happened to have a basketball hoop in the back corner. With the rain
falling on the court, it occurred to me that there were three interesting elements
to the scene – and perhaps by just taking pictures of scenes like that, I could
build up a library of interesting settings and controlled variations that we could
describe and try to reproduce with our models. I started tentatively, thinking to
take a couple hundred pictures. However, it takes time to build out a team and
annotation process and this ended up growing substantially, to 15,000+ images.
This was fueled in part by the fact that it started as we were coming out of the
COVID pandemic lockdown and my family made up for lost travel opportunities,
including vacations and many trips for my son’s tennis tournaments, plus I had
work travel to California and New York. This gave me opportunities to capture
animals in the Everglades, the scenes and simulacra of Las Vegas, statues and
buildings in NYC, cacti in Arizona, and many more, in addition to places and
things all around Texas (my home state).
     The nature of my choices was thus fueled in part by where I ended up, the
activities I and my family took part in, what I found inherently interesting, and
my goal of finding tricky or useful scenes for text-to-image models – combined
with the exclusion of faces. As such, there are some clear biases in the image
collection as a whole, including many images related to tennis, cars (I used to
22     Y. Onoe et al.

restored old cheap sports cars in high school), farm and wild animals found in
Texas, my own pets, graffiti, views from Google’s high rise office building in
Austin, and so on. I hope that my own act of taking and releasing images for
research purposes will spur other researchers to release similar collections – and
thus not only add quantity but also reduce the bias in the available images we
collectively have for research with Creative Commons (or similar) licensing.
    There are some notable aspects of themes and nature of the images:

 – In addition to taking new pictures, I also dug back through images in my
   iPhotos collection to identify earlier images that were DOCCI-able.
 – While the majority of the images were taken of existing moments or scenes,
   a fair number were set up to explicitly test categories like text rendering,
   spatial relations, counting, attribute binding and mixed media. Often, I used
   my kids’ toys or random found objects to create images that were generally
   clean (not a lot of background detail) but had two, three or even four or
   more distinct objects in precise spatial configurations.
 – Despite the exclusion of faces, I tried to find some creative ways to indirectly
   include people in it, via statues, shadows (e.g. a shadow that points to a
   specific object or letter) or hands holding things.
 – We got both our labradoodle Ivy and my daughter’s cat Yoshi during the
   collection, and they both have pictures from various stages of their develop-
   ment. With their entity annotations, this could provide for some interesting
   Dreambooth-style [50] explorations of the same entity at different ages.
 – I tried to obtain groups of images covering multiple forms of the same basic
   objects, such as real horses, horse statues, carvings of horses, toys and fig-
   urines of horses, and so on, the same kind of car in both toy and real form,
   or orcas and dolphins in real life and toy form doing similar actions.
 – There are many photos taken on US highways (covering regions from Texas
   to California, to Michigan, to North Carolina, and more). These were taken
   either while others were driving, or by my wife or son while I was.
 – I captured many images of clocks, and annotators were instructed to include
   the indicated time in their descriptions. We have not directly tested genera-
   tion of clocks with the correct time in this paper, DOCCI’s data can support
   this precise and easily measured task.
 – Traveling to many tennis tournaments meant staying at many hotels and
   bed and breakfasts, allowing for a diverse range of home and hotel scenes.
 – The fact the collection spanned over a year means that aspects of all seasons
   and holidays in the US (primarily Texas) are represented.

I feel incredibly fortunate that I had the opportunity and means to embark on
this photo quest, and work with an amazing team to create DOCCI from them.
It also opened my eyes to see the world differently and find new details every
place I went. That said, the photographs themselves are generally not beautiful,
high quality ones that a trained photographer would have been able to capture;
mostly I just snapped something quickly so that it would be describable and
useful as a reference for images later generated from those descriptions.
                DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images        23

Curation. Throughout the whole period of taking pictures, I kept a rough inter-
nal mental model of things that would be novel or interestingly different from
those I had already gotten pictures of. After queuing up a set up pictures, I
would go through them (often during down times at tennis tournaments) to se-
lect which to keep and crop them to reduce visual clutter (to focus on the main
reason for having taken a specific image). For cropping, I never changed aspect
ratio – only zoomed in and selected a sub-part of the image. Every few months,
I transferred the images for annotation (culling many in the process). Finally,
when reviewing clusters before annotation, I selected some for deletion if they
were not sufficiently distinctive (e.g. images of clouds, caves, fields and such).

DOCCI AAR Images. We capped the collection in September 2022 for the main
DOCCI collection. However, I had the opportunity to make further trips, includ-
ing to Canada and Europe, and ended up taking more to build up a further, more
diverse, set of images that could be released for research. In many ways, these
are nicer images than the DOCCI core images, because of the subject matter
(so many incredible locations and interesting or beautiful objects), my increased
use of compositional aspects like rule of thirds, photographic techniques such as
bokeh, and the freedom to select the best crop rather than being constrained
to only standard landscape and portrait. I also rotated and straightened many
of these to improve their perspective and alignment. Though we are doing new
work with these, we release them now along with DOCCI rather than holding on
to them. We do this so that others who use DOCCI will be able to immediately
take advantage of this temporally and spatially displaced set of images that I
also took, e.g. for things like iterative caption-and-image generation.


B    Key Visual Features
Objects All primary and secondary objects, either animate (e.g., cats and dogs)
   or inanimate (e.g., statues), that play key roles in the images.
Attributes Each object possesses important attributes, including shape, size,
   color, material, texture, pose, action, and state.
Spatial Relationships The orientation refers to the locations of objects in the
   image (e.g., center, top right). The direction indicates the way objects are
   facing based on the point of view (i.e., the camera view). When multiple
   objects are in the image, the relative position determine the locations of two
   or more objects.
Text Alphabets, numbers, and other characters can be found on different sur-
   faces and materials (e.g., paper, sign boards, and concrete walls) in various
   forms (e.g., print, handwriting, chalk, and carving). In addition, text can be
   written in different styles (e.g., fonts and colors).
Counts The counts of primary and secondary objects appearing in the image.
   We focus on numbers up to approximately twenty, as tracking attributes for
   too many objects becomes difficult.
24      Y. Onoe et al.

World Knowledge Objects in the image may be named entities, potentially
   requiring background knowledge (e.g., One World Trade Center in the NYC
   cityscape).
Scenes Images could have been taken indoors or outdoors, and either during
   the daytime or at nighttime.
Views The view types and camera angles define the overall frame. A view type
   is a combination of the horizontal position (e.g., front, back, side, three-
   quarter), the vertical position (e.g., bird’s-eye, eye-level, worm’s-eye), and
   the depth (e.g., close-up, medium, long).
Optical Effects Lighting is one of the salient features of the image. Shiny out-
   door objects can reflect sunlight and cast shadows on the ground during the
   day. Images may become obscured or less distinct due to weather or lighting
   conditions.


C     Annotation Details
C.1    Annotation Pipeline
Stage 1: Extracting Key Information First, we instruct annotators to ex-
tract key visual features and write brief descriptions of them, relating to the
aspects listed in to the aspects listed in Appendix B. These descriptions may
not always form complete sentences or phrases. Annotators may leave certain
aspects blank if they do not find the corresponding information in the images.
The goal of this stage is to extract salient information from images quickly.

Stage 2: Writing Descriptions In this stage, annotators are asked to write
complete descriptions based on the key information extracted in the previous
stage. Annotators can view the image and a brief description to capture the key
information directly within the annotation UI, enabling them to concentrate on
their writing. The descriptions generated at this stage will serve as the first draft,
which will be refined in the next stage.

Stage 3: Elaborating Descriptions The first draft often misses key details in
the image; therefore, we conduct the revising stage to address these omissions.
Based on the descriptions from the previous stage, we request annotators to
create more detailed and elaborated descriptions. Specifically, we ask them to
include the key aspects listed in Appendix B. The goal of this phase is to refine
the descriptions to be as detailed and specific as possible, ensuring they uniquely
correspond to the images they describe.

C.2    Quality Control
Annotation Workflow For all stages, we provided comprehensive annotation
guidelines and conducted pilot studies. We then proceeded to the full annota-
tion process once the annotators had become familiar with the tasks. For the
                 DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images          25

stage 3, annotators who had passed our qualification tests participated in the
full annotation process. We grouped images into 149 clusters based on image
similarity.7 We deployed those clusters as batches, maintaining small batch sizes
of no more than 200 images, and provided feedback daily. This approach al-
lowed us to provide batch specific guidelines with ease, ensuring that mistakes
and misunderstandings were not carried over to later batches. In this stage, we
collaborated with US-based annotators, who are familiar with the background
knowledge of the DOCCI images, to ensure accurate interpretation and analy-
sis. The curator also provided textual guidance for many images prior to stage 3
to clarify what was depicted in difficult situations (such as dinosaur tracks), to
provide specific world knowledge that was either easy to state or which would
be hard to verify for annotators on their own, or to provide specific cues about
what was interesting about the photo so that their resulting description would
reflect the challenge behind the curator’s intention in taking the photo.
Images We manually reviewed all images and removed any personally iden-
tifiable information (PII), such as people’s faces, phone numbers, URLs, and
account names of SNS (Social Network Services). Additionally, we ran a safe
search detection tool8 on the images to identify potentially harmful content.
97.6% of images were judged to be unlikely harmful. We manually reviewed the
remaining 2.4% of images and confirmed that they are false positives.
Text Descriptions We primarily focused on two types of errors included in the
annotated descriptions: precision and recall errors. Precision governs incorrect
information, while recall concerns the omission of information. For example, us-
ing a wrong object name will be penalized with precision, and failing to include
key attributes will be treated as a recall error. For the precision errors, we inves-
tigated the results of a text-image alignment metric such as V Q2 [62], which a
VQA model provides confidence scores to the questions derived from a descrip-
tion. For example, in the statement, “The car in faded baby blue is parked on
a field of dry grass,” a corresponding question-answer pair would be: Q: "What
color is the car?" A: "Faded baby blue." The VQA model then calculates the
likelihood of the answer being accurate. Answer pairs with low probabilities
indicate potential inaccuracies in the description. To mitigate precision errors,
we reviewed descriptions with low confidence scores to ensure the accuracy of
the highlighted information. To mitigate the recall errors, we inspect descrip-
tions that fall below the 10 percentile in length. Short and brief descriptions
often omit key details, making the length of the description a reliable indicator.
Finally, we asked annotators to rewrite the disqualified descriptions.

C.3    Annotator Qualification Tests
Creating detailed descriptions for images requires a variety of skills, including
comprehensive knowledge about the subjects depicted in the images and profi-
7
    We used in-house image embeddings to compute similarity.
8
    We used Google Cloud Vision API: https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/
    detecting-safe-search
26     Y. Onoe et al.




                                            A medium-close-up view of two cats. One is a white cat with black ears and a black tail and a
                                            brown cat with a grey neck belt is sitting together on the bed and licking the white cat. A white
                                            pillow is on the bed and a plain cream wall is behind it. A shadow of some object is falling on
                                            the wall and it is an outdoor view.




                                            An indoor medium close up view of two cats, a brown and a white cat. A brown cat with a
                                            grey belt and a white cat with black ears and tail. The brown cat is playing with the white cat.
                                            Behind the cats, a white bed and the wall are on the left.




         Fig. 9: The annotation UI for Stage 3: Elaborating Descriptions.



cient writing abilities. Given that the majority of these images are captured in
the United States, we prefer to assign our annotation tasks to US-based anno-
tators in Stage 3. We initially explain our annotation guidelines and standards
to candidates through documents and training sessions. Then, we ask the can-
didates to annotate ten images and evaluate the quality of their descriptions.
Candidates who achieve the minimum score (4 out of 5) are invited to partic-
ipate in full-scale annotation. Candidates who receive lower scores may retake
the qualification test up to three times. Those who fail the exam three times are
not allowed to advance to full-scale annotation.


C.4   Annotation UI

Annotating Text Description In Stage 3 of annotation pipeline, we ask an-
notators to expand upon and refine the descriptions provided in Stage 2. In the
user interface (UI), as illustrated in Figure 9, an annotator is shown one image
along with two descriptions from Stage 2. We encourage annotators to employ
Google Image Search to identify any objects in the images that they might not
recognize. Additionally, we instruct annotators to report any personally identi-
fiable information (PII) or inappropriate content they find in the images in the
“Observations” box.


Image Elimination In the human evaluation described in Section 3.3, we
ask human annotators to identify the correct pivot image from a set of four
similar images (i.e., distractors), based on the pivot’s description. For this, we
sample 1k pivots images from the test set (DOCCI-Test-Pivots). Then, we
collect other images as distractor candidates from the test set, based on their
                 DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images            27




    Fig. 10: The annotation UI for the human evaluation discussed in Section 3.3.


similarity scores and sample four as distractors, ensuring that all images appear
as a distractor for at least one pivot. This produces 1,000 groups of five images,
and each is evaluated by three annotators. We designed an elimination-based UI,
as depicted in Figure 10, because eliminating unmatched images is substantially
quicker and simpler than choosing a pivot image from a set of five images. This
approach allows annotators to make judgments without needing to read the
entire description, consequently reducing the average response time to less than
a minute.

Side-by-Side Human Evaluation In this side-by-side (SxS) human evalu-
ation framework, annotators are asked to provide a 5-point Likert scale score
for both precision and recall. They are also instructed to highlight text spans
with incorrect information in red and to mark text containing information that
is missing but present in another description in blue. Additionally, annotators
must provide justifications in text form. See Figure 5 for an illustrative example.


D     Object Statistics in DOCCI Images
Figure 12 plots the counts of popular object types detected by an object detection
tool that was run on the images. Since images have been taken in everyday
scenes, the object coverage is remarkably diverse, capturing a wide range of
subjects from both indoor and outdoor settings.
28     Y. Onoe et al.




Fig. 11: The annotation UI for the side-by-side human evaluation discussed in Sec-
tion 4.



E    Error Analysis for Text-to-Image Generation models

We discuss the common error modes exhibited by the three SOTA models on
the DOCCI qualification test set. We compare the generated images along with
their descriptions and reference images in Figure 13. Note that each model has
different maximum input lengths: 128 for Imagen, 4,000 characters for DALL-E
3, and 77 tokens for SDXL. Any prompt exceeding these limits will be truncated,
potentially limiting the ability of models, especially Imagen and SDXL, to fully
incorporate all information from the descriptions into the generated images.
    (a) The three models show different types of errors. Imagen misunderstands
a mural, resulting in the generation of a photorealistic image of a dog and cat
(style). The image generated by DALL-E 3 combines a real car parked in the lot
with a drawing of a cat and dog, which is an example of media blending [64].
SDXL completely misses the number of cats (counting), and a dog appears in a
location where it is physically impossible (common sense). All models struggle
with spatial relations and directions of the objects (e.g, the orientations of the
cat and dog, the directions of their heads).
                     DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images     29


      5000
#Images

      2500


          0
                          Plant
                            Sky


                 Road surface

            Tints and shades
                         Wood

                         Grass
                             Art
                           Font



                     Rectangle
                         Cloud
                      Building
                       Asphalt

                       Vehicle
           Natural landscape
                    Landscape
                            Gas




                        Facade




                           Twig
                Motor vehicle
                         Wheel
                            Tire
              Automotive tire
                       Window
                      Flooring
                            Car
              Terrestrial plant

                  Electric blue
                         Metal
                           Grey
                       Pattern
           Automotive design
                     Sculpture
            Terrestrial animal
                            Soil
          Automotive lighting
                Urban design
                          Hood
                           Tree




                         Water




                 Groundcover



                          Trunk




                            City
          Composite material
                         Circle



                           Wall
                         Event
                     Hardwood
                            Cat
                     Carnivore




                       Felidae
Fig. 12: 50 most common objects that appear in the DOCCI images. We use an off-
the-shelf object detection tool and count object labels.

    (b) DALL-E 3 impressively captures the key idea of this prompt, the statue
is in a serving position and is trying to hit the sun. However, its viewpoint
(a high angle view instead of a front view) and style are inaccurate, and two
tennis balls are added (hallucination). Imagen and SDXL completely miss the
key idea of this prompt, likely due to their limited input lengths.
    (c) This example involves an uncommon variant of a familiar object, a toy
clock with colorful blocks, and text rendering. Imagen demonstrates relatively
better rendering of letters but misspells “watch.” More critically, it depicts a
standard clock instead of the desired toy clock with hour numbers on small,
colorful blocks (strong linguistic prior). DALL-E 3 creates an image of a
clock with small blocks on its face; however, it confuses the blocks beneath the
clock with those on the clock face (feature blending). SDXL fails to produce
an accurate image of a toy clock (e.g., the second hand sticks out from the clock
face).
    (d) All three models struggle to count objects correctly even in this simple
case (counting). DALL-E 3 correctly depicts the horses in varying sizes (the
leftmost horse is one-third the size of the others) and with the correct orientation
(all the horses are facing right). However, it fails to capture the spatial relation
accurately; the tile wall is not positioned directly behind the toy horses. Imagen
and SDXL fail to capture the correct orientation because this information is
provided later in the description, which might lead to it being truncated.
    These examples suggest that T2I models have difficulty adhering to
detailed descriptions precisely, primarily because of their limited un-
derstanding of textural input (e.g., orientations/directions in words)
and architectural constraints, (e.g., the maximum input length). We
urge further model development for future work.


F             Datasheet for DOCCI

We provide our responses to the questions listed in the Datasheets for Datasets
[20].
30          Y. Onoe et al.

        Original                        Imagen                       DALL-E 3                         SDXL




     (a) An outdoor wide angle shot large wall art mural of a white and brown dog and a black and gray cat leaning
     out of the rear driver side window have a blue compact car with both of their front paws hanging out. The dog's
     mouth is open, lower teeth exposed, and its red tongue flailing backwards in the wind. Both animals look
     forward to the left, with the cat's ears straight up and the dog's ears also flailing in the wind. The cat is
     wearing a green color and the dog with a red collar, each with a round tag angled toward the back from the
     wind. The background of the mural has a pink and purple zebra stripe pattern. Orange, red, and grey clouds are
     painted behind the car along the upper edge of the mural, adding depth to the image. White lines are painted on
     the asphalt Crown in front of the mural, creating four parking spots. The two parking spots to the left contain
     a white handicap symbol. A shadow of the wall is being cast down onto the parking blocks aligned in front of
     the wall from the sun high and behind. The viewable blue sky above consist of a large cluster of altocumulus
     clouds.




     (b) A front view of a statue on cement in a park. The statue is of a person with a tennis racket in their right
     hand. They are facing to the left, and the left arm is extended out to the sky. The statue is dark and covered
     in a shadow. It is on a cement square with dirt around it. The sun is shining on it. The extended arm with the
     hand open and up is directly under the sun that is shining in the blue sky. It looks like the sun is the ball
     the statue is releasing to hit for a serve. Stones are around the dirt and cement square that the statue is on.
     A shadow is on the cement and dirt in the front. Some green plants are around the square. There are 2 black
     spotlights on the ground aimed at the statue. Grass is around the area, and bushes can be seen on the right in
     a circle with stones around them. Trees are in the distance on the far right. Past the grass are parked cars on
     cement. Some tall trees are on the far left. A tall tree is behind the statue. A flag pole is near a white
     parked car on the left with an American flag on it that is hanging down.




     (c) An up-close view of a colorful clock toy is seen with small blocks below spelling 'WATCH'. The clock base
     is red, with shaped blocks around the edge in different colors with white numbers printed on them from one to
     twelve. Inside the clock are two arms to show the time, the short green one reads 'HOUR', while the long blue
     one reads 'MINUTE'. Intervals of five are seen next to small green dots inside the clock circle. The toy and
     blocks sit on a cool-tone faux wood tabletop with black striations. The light is coming from a slight angle
     above the clock, as evident from the shadow being cast down from the clock toy.




     (d) An indoor, close up shot of the side of 4 small horse toy figures placed on the side of the bathtub, with a
     white tile wall directly behind the horses. The left most horse is one third of the size compared to the
     others. The left most horse is completely white with a black mane and tail. The horse second to the left is
     brown with a brown mane and tail, with its left half of its body covered in white with red dots. The third
     horse to the left is dark brown with a black mane and tail. The horse all the way on the right is light brown
     with a black mane and tail. All the horses are facing to the right.

Fig. 13: Images generated by SOTA T2I models using DOCCI descriptions as prompts.
The leftmost image is the reference, and the remaining four images are generated by
Imagen, DALL-E 3, and Stable Diffusion XL, respectively.
                 DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images         31

F.1   Motivation For Datasheet Creation

What tasks could the dataset be used for? DOCCI is directly usable for
text-to-image and image-to-text generation tasks. Additionally, it can facilitate
other vision-language tasks, such as image-to-text and text-to-image retrieval.


Who funded the creation dataset? Google Research


F.2   Datasheet Composition

What are the instances? Are there multiple types of instances? Images
with text descriptions


How many instances are there in total? 14,847 annotated images (DOCCI)
and 8,932 unannotated images (DOCCI-AAR)


What data does each instance consist of ? A single instance consists of an
image and a text description.


Is there a label or target associated with each instance? We provide
entity tags for 15 distinct entities that occur in multiple images.


Is any information missing from individual instances? The entity tags
mentioned above are only available for certain images, not for all images.


Are relationships between individual instances made explicit? We pro-
vide the cluster ID for each image. Please note that these clusters are identified
using k-means, not by human annotators.


Does the dataset contain all possible instances or is it a sample of
instances from a larger set? DOCCI is a newly created dataset and is not a
subset of any existing dataset.


Are there recommended data splits? We split DOCCI into four sets:
9,647 train, 5,000 test, 100 qualification-dev, and 100 qualification-test. We split
DOCCI-AAR into 3,932 trai and 5,000 test sets.


Are there any errors, sources of noise, or redundancies in the dataset?
Annotation errors, such as precision and recall errors and typos, may be present
in the dataset. DOCCI is designed to include similar images; however, we have
removed images that are exactly the same, based on similarity scores.
32     Y. Onoe et al.

Is the dataset self-contained, or does it link to or otherwise rely on
external resources? DOCCI is self-contained.

F.3   Collection Process
What mechanisms or procedures were used to collect the data? All
images were taken by one of the authors and their family. All text descriptions
were written by human annotators. We do not rely on any automated process
in our data annotation pipeline.

How was the data associated with each instance acquired? We curated
all images and annotated text descriptions. We do not use any existing datasets
or other data sources.

If the dataset is a sample from a larger set, what was the sampling
strategy? We did not sample anything from a larger set.

Who was involved in the data collection process and how were they
compensated? We disclose this upon acceptance.

Over what timeframe was the data collected? The images were curated
from August 2021 to September 2022. The text descriptions were annotated in
2023.

F.4   Data Preprocessing
Was any preprocessing/cleaning/labeling of the data done? We manu-
ally reviewed all images for personally identifiable information (PII), removing
some images and blurring detected faces, phone numbers, and URLs to protect
privacy. For text descriptions, we instructed annotators to exclude any PII, such
as people’s names, phone numbers, and URLs. After the annotation phase, we
employed automatic tools to scan for PII, ensuring the descriptions remained
free of such information.

Was the “raw” data saved in addition to the preprocessed/cleaned/lab–
eled data? No

Is the software used to preprocess/clean/label the instances available?
No

Does this dataset collection/processing procedure achieve the mo-
tivation for creating the dataset stated in the first section of this
datasheet? Yes
                DOCCI: Descriptions of Connected and Contrasting Images    33

F.5   Dataset Distribution

How will the dataset be distributed? The dataset is available at https:
//google.github.io/docci.


When will the dataset be released/first distributed? What license (if
any) is it distributed under? We release the dataset in March 2024. DOCCI
will be released under the CC-BY 4.0 license.


Are there any copyrights on the data? No


Are there any fees or access/export restrictions? No


F.6   Dataset Maintenance

Who is supporting/hosting/maintaining the dataset? This dataset will
be maintained by the authors of this paper.


Will the dataset be updated? As DOCCI is designed for evaluation purposes,
we do not anticipate any future updates. However, should significant errors be
discovered within the dataset, we may consider making modifications.


How will updates be communicated? Updates will be posted on the dataset
website.


If the dataset becomes obsolete how will this be communicated? Up-
dates will be posted on the dataset website.


F.7   Legal and Ethical Considerations

Were any ethical review processes conducted (e.g., by an institutional
review board)? Yes


Does the dataset contain data that might be considered confidential?
No


Does the dataset contain data that, if viewed directly, might be offen-
sive, insulting, threatening, or might otherwise cause anxiety? No


Does the dataset relate to people? Very few images, as taken, contained
PII including people.
34     Y. Onoe et al.

Does the dataset identify any subpopulations? We manually reviewed all
images for PII. We removed some images and otherwise scrubbed any detected
faces, phone numbers, and URLs by blurring them.


Is it possible to identify individuals, either directly or indirectly from
the dataset? No (see above)


Does the dataset contain data that might be considered sensitive in
any way? No


Did you collect the data from the individuals in question directly, or
obtain it via third parties or other sources? We collected text descriptions
from human annotators whom we hired.


Were the individuals in question notified about the data collection?
Yes
