Original source: https://jmlr.org/papers/volume11/cawley10a/cawley10a.pdf
Read on: 2026-10-04
Extraction: pdftotext -layout; line ranges are from that full extraction.

Extracted lines 14-39:


Editor: Isabelle Guyon


                                                           Abstract
     Model selection strategies for machine learning algorithms typically involve the numerical opti-
     misation of an appropriate model selection criterion, often based on an estimator of generalisation
     performance, such as k-fold cross-validation. The error of such an estimator can be broken down
     into bias and variance components. While unbiasedness is often cited as a beneficial quality of a
     model selection criterion, we demonstrate that a low variance is at least as important, as a non-
     negligible variance introduces the potential for over-fitting in model selection as well as in training
     the model. While this observation is in hindsight perhaps rather obvious, the degradation in perfor-
     mance due to over-fitting the model selection criterion can be surprisingly large, an observation that
     appears to have received little attention in the machine learning literature to date. In this paper, we
     show that the effects of this form of over-fitting are often of comparable magnitude to differences
     in performance between learning algorithms, and thus cannot be ignored in empirical evaluation.
     Furthermore, we show that some common performance evaluation practices are susceptible to a
     form of selection bias as a result of this form of over-fitting and hence are unreliable. We dis-
     cuss methods to avoid over-fitting in model selection and subsequent selection bias in performance
     evaluation, which we hope will be incorporated into best practice. While this study concentrates
     on cross-validation based model selection, the findings are quite general and apply to any model
     selection practice involving the optimisation of a model selection criterion evaluated over a finite
     sample of data, including maximisation of the Bayesian evidence and optimisation of performance
     bounds.
     Keywords: model selection, performance evaluation, bias-variance trade-off, selection bias, over-

Extracted lines 70-89:
the problem of over-fitting in model selection in more detail, providing illustrative examples, and
describes how to avoid this form of over-fitting in order to gain the best attainable performance,
desirable in practical applications, and required for fair comparison of machine learning algorithms.
    Unbiased and robust1 performance evaluation is undoubtedly the cornerstone of machine learn-
ing research; without a reliable indication of the relative performance of competing algorithms,
across a wide range of learning tasks, we cannot have the clear picture of the strengths and weak-
nesses of current approaches required to set the direction for future research. This topic is consid-
ered in the second part of the paper, specifically focusing on the undesirable optimistic bias that
can arise due to over-fitting in model selection. This phenomenon is essentially analogous to the
selection bias observed by Ambroise and McLachlan (2002) in microarray classification, due to
feature selection prior to performance evaluation, and shares a similar solution. We show that some,
apparently quite benign, performance evaluation protocols in common use by the machine learning
community are susceptible to this form of bias, and thus potentially give spurious results. In order
to avoid this bias, model selection must be treated as an integral part of the model fitting process and
performed afresh every time a model is fitted to a new sample of data. Furthermore, as the differ-
ences in performance due to model selection are shown to be often of comparable magnitude to the
difference in performance between learning algorithms, it seems no longer meaningful to evaluate
the performance of machine learning algorithms in isolation, and we should instead compare learn-
ing algorithm/model selection procedure combinations. However, this means that robust unbiased
performance evaluation is likely to require more rigorous and computationally intensive protocols,

