Original paper snapshot
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762v7
Version date: 2023-08-02
Accessed: 2026-10-03
Downloaded PDF SHA-256: bdfaa68d8984f0dc02beaca527b76f207d99b666d31d1da728ee0728182df697
Extraction: pdftotext -layout, selected original passages; original line numbering retained below.

pdftotext -layout lines 113–171:
Most competitive neural sequence transduction models have an encoder-decoder structure [5, 2, 35].
Here, the encoder maps an input sequence of symbol representations (x1 , ..., xn ) to a sequence
of continuous representations z = (z1 , ..., zn ). Given z, the decoder then generates an output
sequence (y1 , ..., ym ) of symbols one element at a time. At each step the model is auto-regressive
[10], consuming the previously generated symbols as additional input when generating the next.


                                                   2

                          Figure 1: The Transformer - model architecture.


The Transformer follows this overall architecture using stacked self-attention and point-wise, fully
connected layers for both the encoder and decoder, shown in the left and right halves of Figure 1,
respectively.

3.1   Encoder and Decoder Stacks

Encoder: The encoder is composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. Each layer has two
sub-layers. The first is a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second is a simple, position-
wise fully connected feed-forward network. We employ a residual connection [11] around each of
the two sub-layers, followed by layer normalization [1]. That is, the output of each sub-layer is
LayerNorm(x + Sublayer(x)), where Sublayer(x) is the function implemented by the sub-layer
itself. To facilitate these residual connections, all sub-layers in the model, as well as the embedding
layers, produce outputs of dimension dmodel = 512.

Decoder: The decoder is also composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. In addition to the two
sub-layers in each encoder layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head
attention over the output of the encoder stack. Similar to the encoder, we employ residual connections
around each of the sub-layers, followed by layer normalization. We also modify the self-attention
sub-layer in the decoder stack to prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions. This
masking, combined with fact that the output embeddings are offset by one position, ensures that the
predictions for position i can depend only on the known outputs at positions less than i.

3.2   Attention

An attention function can be described as mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs to an output,
where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors. The output is computed as a weighted sum


                                                  3

           Scaled Dot-Product Attention                                  Multi-Head Attention




Figure 2: (left) Scaled Dot-Product Attention. (right) Multi-Head Attention consists of several
attention layers running in parallel.


of the values, where the weight assigned to each value is computed by a compatibility function of the
query with the corresponding key.

3.2.1   Scaled Dot-Product Attention
We call our particular attention "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" (Figure 2). The input consists of
queries and keys of dimension dk , and
                                    √ values of dimension dv . We compute the dot products of the
query with all keys, divide each by dk , and apply a softmax function to obtain the weights on the

pdftotext -layout lines 253–261:
from layer to layer. Another way of describing this is as two convolutions with kernel size 1.
The dimensionality of input and output is dmodel = 512, and the inner-layer has dimensionality
df f = 2048.

3.4     Embeddings and Softmax

Similarly to other sequence transduction models, we use learned embeddings to convert the input
tokens and output tokens to vectors of dimension dmodel . We also use the usual learned linear transfor-
mation and softmax function to convert the decoder output to predicted next-token probabilities. In
