URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1606.06565v2
Version: arXiv:1606.06565v2 [cs.AI] 25 Jul 2016
Title: Concrete Problems in AI Safety
Authors: Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, Dan Mane
Accessed: 2026-10-04
Downloaded PDF SHA-256: a3ac7eda67026d6d95f2182b1202ac371b7d9feabcc10a48dc90e417fbac023e
Locator: Section 4 Avoiding Reward Hacking, printed pages 7–8
Conversion: pdftotext -layout

4    Avoiding Reward Hacking
Imagine that an agent discovers a buffer overflow in its reward function: it may then use this to
get extremely high reward in an unintended way. From the agent’s point of view, this is not a bug,
but simply how the environment works, and is thus a valid strategy like any other for achieving
reward. For example, if our cleaning robot is set up to earn reward for not seeing any messes,
it might simply close its eyes rather than ever cleaning anything up. Or if the robot is rewarded
for cleaning messes, it may intentionally create work so it can earn more reward. More broadly,
formal rewards or objective functions are an attempt to capture the designer’s informal intent, and
sometimes these objective functions, or their implementation, can be “gamed” by solutions that are
valid in some literal sense but don’t meet the designer’s intent. Pursuit of these “reward hacks” can
lead to coherent but unanticipated behavior, and has the potential for harmful impacts in real-world
systems. For example, it has been shown that genetic algorithms can often output unexpected but
formally correct solutions to problems [157, 23], such as a circuit tasked to keep time which instead
developed into a radio that picked up the regular RF emissions of a nearby PC.
Some versions of reward hacking have been investigated from a theoretical perspective, with a
focus on variations to reinforcement learning that avoid certain types of wireheading [71, 43, 49] or
demonstrate reward hacking in a model environment [127]. One form of the problem has also been
studied in the context of feedback loops in machine learning systems (particularly ad placement)
[29, 135], based on counterfactual learning [29, 151] and contextual bandits [4]. The proliferation of



                                                  7

reward hacking instances across so many different domains suggests that reward hacking may be a
deep and general problem, and one that we believe is likely to become more common as agents and
environments increase in complexity. Indeed, there are several ways in which the problem can occur:
   • Partially Observed Goals: In most modern RL systems, it is assumed that reward is directly
     experienced, even if other aspects of the environment are only partially observed. In the real
     world, however, tasks often involve bringing the external world into some objective state, which
     the agent can only ever confirm through imperfect perceptions. For example, for our proverbial
     cleaning robot, the task is to achieve a clean office, but the robot’s visual perception may give
     only an imperfect view of part of the office. Because agents lack access to a perfect measure
     of task performance, designers are often forced to design rewards that represent a partial or
     imperfect measure. For example, the robot might be rewarded based on how many messes it
     sees. However, these imperfect objective functions can often be hacked—the robot may think
     the office is clean if it simply closes its eyes. While it can be shown that there always exists a
     reward function in terms of actions and observations that is equivalent to optimizing the true
     objective function (this involves reducing the POMDP to a belief state MDP, see [78]), often
     this reward function involves complicated long-term dependencies and is prohibitively hard to
     use in practice.
   • Complicated Systems: Any powerful agent will be a complicated system with the objective
     function being one part. Just as the probability of bugs in computer code increases greatly with
     the complexity of the program, the probability that there is a viable hack affecting the reward
     function also increases greatly with the complexity of the agent and its available strategies. For
     example, it is possible in principle for an agent to execute arbitrary code from within Super
     Mario [141].
   • Abstract Rewards: Sophisticated reward functions will need to refer to abstract concepts
     (such as assessing whether a conceptual goal has been met). These concepts concepts will pos-
     sibly need to be learned by models like neural networks, which can be vulnerable to adversarial
     counterexamples [152, 62]. More broadly, a learned reward function over a high-dimensional
     space may be vulnerable to hacking if it has pathologically high values along at least one
     dimension.
   • Goodhart’s Law: Another source of reward hacking can occur if a designer chooses an
     objective function that is seemingly highly correlated with accomplishing the task, but that
     correlation breaks down when the objective function is being strongly optimized. For exam-
     ple, a designer might notice that under ordinary circumstances, a cleaning robot’s success in
     cleaning up the office is proportional to the rate at which it consumes cleaning supplies, such
     as bleach. However, if we base the robot’s reward on this measure, it might use more bleach
     than it needs, or simply pour bleach down the drain in order to give the appearance of success.
     In the economics literature this is known as Goodhart’s law [63]: “when a metric is used as a
     target, it ceases to be a good metric.”
