Home | AC215
{"@context":"https://schema.org","@type":"Course","author":{"@type":"Person","name":"Rashmi Banthia"},"description":"AC215 - Fall 2026","headline":"Home","name":"AC215: MLOps &amp; LLMOps Course","url":"https://harvard-iacs.github.io/2026-AC215/"}
Skip to main content
Link
Menu
Expand
(external link)
Document
Search
Copy
Copied
AC215
Home
Schedule
Tutorials / Demo
Projects
Milestone 1
Milestone 2
Milestone 3
Milestone 4
Milestone 5
Readings
Staff / Contact
FAQs
This site uses
Just the Docs
, a documentation theme for Jekyll.
Canvas
Ed
AC215 on GitHub
MLOps & LLMOps: Production AI Systems
- AC215
Instructor:
Pavlos Protopapas
🎥
Watch Prof. Pavlos Protopapas’s introductory video
Enrollment is closed - the class has reached capacity.
Table of contents
Course Overview
Course Introduction
Learning Objectives
Course Topics Overview
Logistics & Tools
Lectures
Technologies and Platforms
Prerequisites
Course Components
Team Projects
Quizzes and the “best 4 of 6” rule
Grade Distribution
Course Policies
Getting Help
Late Policy
Late Days
Attendance Policy
On-Campus Students
DCE Students
Academic Honesty
Collaboration & Teamwork
Policy on Usage of Publicly Available Class Material
Consent
Accessibility
Inclusion and Belonging Statement
Auditing
draft: May 22, 2026
Course Overview
Course Introduction
In today’s AI-driven world, building a model is only half the journey. The real challenge is turning that model into a system that is reliable, scalable, and usable in practice.
Welcome to AC215/E115: Productionizing AI. This course focuses on the full lifecycle of machine learning systems, with a strong emphasis on Large Language Models (LLMs). We move beyond model development and focus on what it takes to make systems work in the real world.
You will work with containerization, cloud infrastructure, data pipelines, and modern training workflows. We will cover how to use LLM APIs, build applications around them, fine-tune models for specific tasks, and deploy them at scale. We will also explore emerging patterns such as agentic systems and workflows, where models interact with tools and operate as part of larger pipelines.
The goal is simple: by the end of the course, you should be able to design, build, and deploy a complete AI system.
Learning Objectives
Understand the MLOps, LLMOps, and AIOps ecosystem and its role in modern AI systems.
Deploy and scale AI models, particularly LLM-based systems.
Work with containerization, cloud infrastructure, data pipelines, and advanced training workflows.
Build and operate scalable AI applications.
Course Topics Overview
We have designed an in-depth curriculum to ensure a comprehensive understanding of modern AI systems and MLOps. The topics include (see the
full topics list
):
Introduction:
Begin with an understanding of the importance of MLOps and how it fits in the broader AI and software development ecosystem.
LLM Topics:
Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to many new tools and agents that students will use in their projects. In these lectures, we’ll look at some of these tools, such as LangChain, LlamaIndex, and API-based workflows. We will also explore RAG, agent-based systems, and fine-tuning, including parameter-efficient methods such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA).
Virtual Environments and Virtual Machines:
Learn the foundations of isolated software environments, their importance in AI development, and how virtual machines offer a layer of abstraction over physical hardware.
Containers:
Understand the concept of containerization using tools like Docker, and how they differ from virtual machines.
Connecting to the Cloud: Networking, Authentication & Storage:
Learn how to connect your local development environment to cloud infrastructure. Cover networking basics, service accounts and IAM-based authentication, and reading and writing to cloud storage from your code.
Data Management, Versioning, and Monitoring:
Learn how to label, version, and monitor the data behind your models. Use Label Studio to annotate raw data. Explore specialized tools for managing large-scale datasets for computer vision and language models.
Advanced Training Workflows:
We will cover advanced training workflows, including experiment tracking with tools like Weights & Biases, leveraging multi-GPU setups for accelerated training, exploring serverless training options using Vertex AI, and fine-tuning large language models (LLMs).
Advanced Inference Workflows:
Learn how to deploy, host, and serve models and large language models (LLMs) in production. Cover serverless inference with Cloud Functions, Cloud Run, and Vertex AI Online Prediction, then automate the full data → training → deployment sequence with Vertex AI Pipelines.
System Tradeoffs: Performance, Cost, and Design Choices:
Reason about the tradeoffs behind real system design decisions. Compare latency, throughput, and cost across serving options, and learn how to choose an architecture that fits your budget and your workload.
Evaluating and Monitoring ML Systems in Production:
Learn how to evaluate models and LLM-based systems beyond offline metrics, and how to monitor them after deployment. Cover data and model drift detection, logging, alerting, and testing strategies for production systems.
App Design, Setup, and Code Organization:
Best practices in designing user-centric AI applications, setting up your development environment, and organizing code for scalability and maintainability.
APIs & Frontend:
Learn about RESTful APIs to serve your models and design user interfaces for seamless user interactions.
Automating Software Development: CI, Testing, and CI/CD:
Build automated software development workflows. Cover unit testing and continuous integration, then move to full CI/CD pipelines with GitHub Actions and related tools so that changes are tested and deployed automatically.
Deployment and Scaling: Kubernetes and Infrastructure as Code:
Learn Kubernetes and its significance in deploying containerized applications. Start with a local cluster to understand pods, deployments, and services, then scale your application to production on a managed cloud cluster. Along the way, define and manage that infrastructure in code rather than by hand, using Pulumi to provision, version, and reproducibly deploy the resources your application depends on.
Logistics & Tools
Lectures
Location:
SEC 1.321
Meeting Time:
Tuesday and Thursday 12:45 - 2:45 PM
For Extension Students Only:
Via Zoom
Technologies and Platforms
We use TensorFlow and PyTorch for examples, with a primary focus on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).
Equivalent materials are available for AWS. However, we will not demonstrate AWS in lectures, and support for AWS-specific issues will be limited.
Prerequisites
You are expected to be comfortable with the following:
Python Programming
Writing functions, using classes, and organizing code into modules
Familiarity with libraries such as NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib
Deep Learning (TensorFlow or PyTorch)
Basic model building, training, and data handling
You should have trained simple models before
Command Line Basics
Navigating directories, running scripts, and basic file operations
Core Python Data Structures
Lists, dictionaries, and how to manipulate them
File I/O
Reading from and writing to files
Basic ML Concepts
What a model is, how it is trained, and how it is evaluated
You do
not
need to be an expert in all of these areas. However, you should be comfortable learning quickly and working through technical material independently.
If you are unsure whether you meet these prerequisites, a simple guideline is:
If you have completed an introductory machine learning course and have written Python code for it, you should be prepared.
Course Components
Lectures & Tutorials:
Each class is 2 hours. The first ~75 minutes focus on core concepts. The remaining time is a hands-on tutorial where we apply what you just learned.
Support Hours / TF Meetings:
Before MS1 (team formation):
Open support hours with TFs for general questions and guidance.
After MS1:
Structured team meetings with your assigned TF (scheduled weekly), focused on project progress and feedback.
MS2–MS4 evaluations:
Each of these milestones is evaluated
during your regular weekly TF meeting
as a
15-minute team presentation (with slides) to your assigned project TF
. The TF will ask questions of the team and of individual members about both the progress shown in the slides and the details of your GitHub repository.
Quizzes (6 total; best 4 of 6 count):
Short assessments to evaluate understanding of core concepts. Quizzes are
in-person for on-campus students
and
online for DCE students
.
Team Projects:
Collaborate with classmates to build a fully functional AI application.
Supplementary Readings:
Curated materials to deepen understanding. This field moves fast, so developing the habit of independent reading is part of the course.
Team Projects
You will
design and build your own project
in a team (3-5 members). The staff will help you scope and refine the idea, but the direction and execution are yours.
By the end of the term, you should have a
working web or mobile application
that:
includes a
meaningful modeling component
(beyond simple API calls), and
is
fully evaluable
by the teaching staff (i.e., we can access, run, and assess all major components without relying on private or inaccessible systems). The expectation is a project comparable in scope to a small production-ready application.
Project Development
You will propose and develop your own project idea.
The goal is to build something functional and meaningful, not just a prototype.
Your project should integrate modeling with a complete system (data, training, deployment, and interface).
Guided Example Project
The teaching team will develop a reference project throughout the semester (
Formaggio
).
Each week, we will highlight one aspect of this system and connect it to course topics.
You are expected to apply similar ideas to your own project as the course progresses.
Milestones and Evaluation
The project is structured through a series of milestones.
These milestones are a major component of your grade and track your progress from idea to final system.
MS2, MS3, and MS4 are evaluated through a 15-minute team presentation (with slides) to your assigned project TF
, held during your regular weekly TF meeting. The TF will ask questions of the team and of individual students, covering both the slides and the contents of your GitHub repository. Every team member must be prepared to answer questions on
all
elements of the project — there is no “I didn’t do that part.” If you cannot speak to a component, that component is not considered learned, regardless of who wrote the code.
MS1 is submitted as a written proposal; MS5 is evaluated through the GitHub repository, final video, blog post, and the Dec 10 showcase.
Details for each milestone will be provided during the semester.
In summary:
The goal is simple: build something real. Your project should be an end-to-end solution that includes modeling, infrastructure, and a usable interface.
Quizzes and the “best 4 of 6” rule
Format:
Quizzes are short (20–30 minutes) and conducted during class time.
Content:
Quizzes include a mix of conceptual questions and short coding tasks (e.g., reading, completing, or modifying code).
Scope:
Quizzes focus on recently covered material and are designed to test practical understanding rather than memorization.
On-campus students
: Quizzes are
in person
. There is
no online version
and
no make-ups
.
DCE students
: Quizzes will be
online
.
Maximum flexibility
: We use the “best
4 of 6
count” rule to accommodate common disruptions (illness, interviews, travel, etc.). Beyond this flexibility, exceptions are very rare. We enforce this consistently for fairness.
Grade Distribution
The table below reflects how we weight
steady project progress
and
understanding of core ideas
(quizzes) relative to the full arc above.
Milestone
Weight
MS1
8%
MS2
14%
MS3
18%
MS4
18%
MS5
24%
Quizzes (6 total; best 4 count)
18%
For more information about the projects and milestones, you can click the links above or visit the
project page
.
Course Policies
Getting Help
ED Forum:
Post questions related to course content or technical issues on the ED forum. This encourages peer learning and allows teaching staff to address common concerns. We regularly monitor the forum to provide guidance.
Teaching Staff Helpline:
For administrative matters or issues requiring staff attention, please send your queries to ac215harvard@gmail.com.
Email the Instructor:
For private or individual concerns, please feel free to directly email the instructor.
Late Policy
All course milestones must be submitted by
10:00 PM ET
on the specified due dates.
Late Days
You have
4 late days total
to use across milestones
MS1–MS4
.
Late days are applied
per group, not per student
. Milestones are submitted as a group, so a late submission uses the same number of late days for every member of that group. For example, if a group submits a milestone 1 day late, each member of that group loses 1 late day and has 3 remaining.
You may use
at most 2 late days per milestone
.
MS5 (final milestone)
:
No late days and no extensions
under any circumstances.
Late days
cannot be transferred, pooled, or borrowed
between students or groups.
In extreme medical or personal emergencies, contact the course staff as soon as possible. We will review such situations on a case-by-case basis, at the teaching team’s discretion. Requests should be communicated
before the deadline whenever possible
. In cases where advance notice is impossible (e.g., emergency hospitalization), contact us as soon as you are able.
Attendance Policy
Per university policy, attendance is required for on-campus students. However, we do not take attendance and will not enforce it directly. Whether you attend is your choice — but based on extensive prior course data, students who attend (semi-regularly) tend to perform better.
On-Campus Students
Some details to consider:
Lecture recordings
: Lectures will be recorded and available to everyone within 24 hours.
No in-class midterm/final
: There is no in-class midterm or final exam.
Showcase
: The main end-of-term in-person requirement is the project showcase (currently scheduled for
Dec 10
, subject to change).
Quizzes
: In person. There is no online version and no make-ups.
DCE Students
Some details to consider:
Lectures are live streamed
: Lectures will be live streamed via Zoom. However, interaction with the professor is not optimal.
Lecture recordings
: Lectures will be recorded and available to everyone within 24 hours.
No in-class midterm/final
: There is no in-class midterm or final exam.
Showcase
: DCE students are welcome to participate in the showcase but not required.
Quizzes
: Online.
Academic Honesty
Students are expected to maintain high standards of academic integrity.
Acceptable Behaviors:
Discussing course materials, engaging in office hours, debugging with peers, using and citing small portions of code found online, seeking online knowledge, and seeking guidance from tutors.
Unacceptable Behaviors:
Accessing or sharing solutions before submission, plagiarizing, not citing sources of external code or techniques, paying or offering payment for coursework, and sharing course material with future potential students.
AI Tools:
You may use AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot) as support tools for learning and development. However, your submission must reflect
your own understanding
. You must be able to explain and defend all code and design decisions in your project. During milestone evaluations, inability to explain AI-generated code will result in grade deductions.
Engaging in unacceptable behaviors will lead to disciplinary action. When in doubt, always consult the course instructors.
Collaboration & Teamwork
Collaboration is encouraged, especially for projects.
However, every team member is expected to understand and be able to explain every part of the project
— code, infrastructure, modeling, deployment, and design decisions. During milestone evaluations, TFs will direct questions to specific team members, and “I didn’t work on that part” is not an acceptable answer. Divide the labor however you like, but make sure the
understanding
is shared across the team.
Policy on Usage of Publicly Available Class Material
Permitted Use:
Class Material is made available primarily for the educational benefit of enrolled students and may be used by others for personal educational purposes only.
Prohibited Use:
Selling or commercializing any part of the Class Material.
Sharing, distributing, or publishing any part of the Class Material in any form or through any medium without explicit permission from the instructor.
Modifying or altering the Class Material to create derivative works.
Attribution:
Any permitted use of the Class Material must carry appropriate acknowledgment of the source (e.g., the instructor’s name, course title, and institution).
Enforcement:
Failure to comply with this policy may result in legal action and/or disciplinary measures as applicable.
Consent
By accessing and using the Class Material, you indicate your acknowledgment and acceptance of this policy.
Accessibility
We are committed to ensuring that this course is accessible to everyone. If you require special accommodations or have any specific needs, please contact the course administrators as soon as possible.
Adherence to accessibility policies and a commitment to fairness, respect for your learning journey, and consideration for the learning journey of your peers are expected from all students.
Inclusion and Belonging Statement
In this data science class, we strive to create a diverse and inclusive learning environment that respects all identities, including race, gender, class, sexuality, religion, and ability. Our goal is to:
Advance ethical data science and expose biases in its applications.
Encourage a variety of thoughts, perspectives, and experiences.
Be a supportive resource, open to understanding and adapting to your unique needs.
To foster inclusion:
Please inform us if your name or pronouns differ from official records.
If something affects your class performance or if you feel uncomfortable with any classroom interactions, reach out to us. You may also find resources at the Harvard Office of Diversity and Inclusion.
Respect and consideration for diverse backgrounds and perspectives are expected from all participants.
Your feedback is essential in enhancing diversity, inclusion, and ethics within our class. Feel free to contact us or submit anonymous suggestions.
Auditing
To request permission to audit the course, please email ac215harvard@gmail.com with the following:
Your
Harvard University ID (HUID)
A brief
statement of agreement
to the auditing terms outlined below
Important:
You must
not
be currently enrolled in the course when making this request. If you are listed as an enrolled student in Canvas, you must drop the course before you can be added as an auditor.
Auditors must agree to the following policies:
✅
In-person attendance is mandatory.
This is a Harvard-wide policy. Auditors who do not confirm their presence during the
first week
of in-class instruction will be removed from the course.
✅
Academic honesty standards apply.
Auditors are expected to follow the same academic integrity rules as enrolled students. Sharing or distributing assignment or solutions is strictly prohibited and will be reported to the Harvard Administrative Board.
✅
No future credit.
Auditors may
not
take this course for credit in the future.
✅
No submissions.
Auditors should
not submit homework, milestones, or participate in course projects
.
✅
Limited access to course resources.
Auditors may not use resources intended for registered students, including
Ed Discussion or TF office hours
.
